30043826	to identify the factors associated with dysphagia in patients undergoing prolonged orotracheal intubation (POTI) and the consequences after extubation. 150 patients who underwent POTI participated in the study and were assessed according to the functional level of swallowing (American Speech Language - Hearing Association National Outcome Measurement System - ASHA NOMS), the determination of severity (The Simplified Acute Physiology Score - SOFA) and the collection of the following variables: age, mortality, days of orotracheal intubation, number of visits to introduce oral feeding and days to hospital discharge. The patients were grouped according to the ASHA classification: 1 (levels 1 and 2), 2 (levels 3, 4 and 5) and 3 (levels 6 and 7). The analyses indicated the following variables associated with worse swallowing functionality: age (p<0.001), mortality (p<0.003); days of OTI (p=0.001), number of visits to introduce oral feeding (p<0.001) and days to hospital discharge (p=0.018). Multiple comparisons indicated a significant difference when comparing the ASHA1 and ASHA2 groups with the ASHA3 group. The ASHA1 and ASHA2 groups had lower SOFA scores when compared to the ASHA3 group (p=0.004). Only 20% of patients in the ASHA1 group and 32% of patients in the ASHA2 group had safe levels of swallowing before hospital discharge. the factors associated with dysphagia in patients who underwent POTI were: age over 55 years and length of orotracheal intubation (longer in cases with worse swallowing function). The post-extubation consequences were: increased mortality and length of hospital stay in the presence of dysphagia.
30043827	To find out about facilitators and barriers in the use of Supplementary and Alternative Communication (SAC) in the perception of family members/caregivers and speech therapists who work with people who use SAC in the family, social and therapeutic contexts. Quantitative and qualitative cross-sectional study with 20 speech therapists (GF) and 20 family members and/or caregivers of ASC users (GFC). Data was collected through semi-structured interviews with specific questionnaires for each group, videotaped and transcribed for analysis. The data was categorized according to the criteria of relevance and repetition into two main thematic axes: barriers and facilitators, containing categories and subcategories. Both groups pointed to the following as barriers: the cost of materials, the use of other forms of communication, family members as interpreters, linguistic-cognitive difficulties and acceptance of the use of CSA by users, lack of understanding/knowledge of CSA by family members and speech inhibition in the perception of family members. Both indicated the following as facilitators: use of high-tech resources, versatility/availability, family involvement/adherence, contextualized use, importance of the therapeutic environment, team and strategies used. The main interlocutors in the implementation of CSA, professionals or family members, can be barriers when they make it difficult for users to exercise their autonomy in communication or facilitators when they encourage and use CSA with users.
30043829	To investigate the performance of Brazilian Portuguese speakers in the Test of Narrative Language and correlate performance in narrative production and comprehension tasks. 140 individuals aged between 5 and 11 years and 11 months with typical language development took part, divided according to age group. A significant difference was found between the 5-year-old group and all the other age groups, as well as for the 6-year-old group when compared to the 8-, 9-, 10- and 11-year-old groups. The 7-year-old group did not differ statistically from the 6- and 8-year-old groups. Half of the 7-year-old group was in first grade and the other half was in second grade, which may have contributed to the group not being different from the borderline age groups. No statistically significant difference was found between the groups from the age of 8 onwards. There was a positive correlation between comprehension and production performance in the 5, 6 and 7 age groups, which was not the case for the other groups. The test differentiated between the 5, 6 and 7 age groups, which was not the case for the 8 and up age groups. Also, from the age of 8, no correlation was found between narrative production and comprehension, indicating mastery of both skills from this age group onwards.
30043842	The aim was to identify sources of access to information for decision-making and barriers to the use of scientific journals among Municipal Health Secretaries in the state of Paraná, Brazil. Municipal health secretaries from 181 municipalities in the state of Paraná took part in the study in 2014. Interviews were conducted on the frequency and use of resources to obtain information on scientific evidence related to the use of scientific journals. In general, 40.9% of the participants were between 18 and 39 years old (mean 43 ± 10.2; median 42 years), had held the position for less than five years (69.1%), were male (56.4%) and only one in three had a postgraduate degree in public health. The main sources of information used were "non-scientific journals" (76.2%), "printed/online newspapers" (71.4%) and "Ministry of Health guidelines" (71.3%). The main barriers reported to the use of scientific journals were "lack of time to read" (72.9%), "high cost of journals" (69.1%) and "difficulty in identifying the best journals" (63.5%). The main sources of access to information used are non-scientific journals and Ministry of Health guidelines. The use of scientific journals is hampered by a lack of time and unfamiliarity with scientific language. Access to scientific information should be facilitated by using more accessible sources, as well as training managers in the use of open access journals. Such actions can help to raise awareness of up-to-date evidence among municipal health secretaries.
30043844	This article discusses the formation of thematic healthcare networks and aims to analyze the potential for optimizing geographic access in the chemotherapy network of the Unified Health System (SUS) in the state of Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil, using linear programming. This is an ex post facto mathematical modeling study, with an analytical objective and qualitative-quantitative approach, which used bibliographic and documentary research as collection procedures. The potential for optimization was assessed by the percentage difference between the sums of the distances covered in the network for the current situation and for the optimal solution obtained. Among the results identified in the optimized situation are a reduction of 293,246km (14.4%) in the total monthly distance traveled in the network, corresponding to an average reduction of 13.02km per procedure performed, compared to the current distance traveled, to be obtained by redistributing the municipalities of origin and the capacities to offer procedures by the reference services. These results indicate that there is great potential for optimization in the network studied, proving that the use of linear programming can offer technical support to the process of shaping new thematic healthcare networks and optimizing existing ones.
30043845	We analyzed the relationship between two sub-areas of Public Health - Planning and Evaluation - through a bibliometric study of articles, theses and dissertations from 1980 to 2016. The overall production of Evaluation surpasses that of Planning, with a marked predominance from the mid-2000s onwards. The ability to influence health sector management seems to drive the dispute between the two subfields. It is considered that both have the theoretical and methodological resources to overcome their reduction to the instrumental logic of so-called managerialism and establish themselves as devices for reflection and change.
30043846	This study aimed to identify the therapeutic itineraries of women affected by severe maternal morbidity. This is a qualitative, descriptive and exploratory study carried out at a university referral hospital for high-risk pregnancies in the interior of the state of São Paulo, Brazil. Sixteen women with serious complications during pregnancy, childbirth or the postpartum period took part. The data was collected through semi-structured interviews, recorded, transcribed and analyzed using Content Analysis. The results show that when women start the process of becoming ill, they follow different paths, looking for low and high complexity services, also looking for neighbors, pharmacies and using self-medication. Obstacles relating to reception, continuity of care, resoluteness and referral within the health care network were highlighted. Important critical points were observed in relation to obstetric care, with pilgrimages to health services, delayed referrals and institutional violence being realities experienced by women. The tertiary service was seen as welcoming and effective. This study made it possible to identify the problems that exist throughout the obstetric care chain, and this knowledge allows us to understand how the health system is organized in relation to the care of women with serious maternal complications.
30043847	The aim was to investigate inequalities in the commitment of household income to private spending on dental care in Brazil. We analyzed data from 55,970 Brazilian households that took part in the nationwide Family Budget Survey in 2008-2009. The commitment of private spending on dental care to household income was calculated by dividing the average annual household spending per capita by the annual household income per capita and estimated according to four categories: > 0%, ≥ 5%, ≥ 10% and ≥ 20%. The analysis of the commitment to income was carried out only for households with positive spending. Only 2,961 (7%) of households reported positive spending on dental care. Overall, the average annual per capita expenditure was R$ 42.19 and R$ 602.47 among those with positive expenditure. The households with the highest absolute expenditure on dental care are those belonging to the urban area and the richest fifth. On the other hand, the households with the greatest commitment to income belong to rural areas and the poorest fifth. Among those who reported positive spending, 55% of households in the poorest fifth committed ≥ 20% of their income to dental care. The percentage is only 6% in the richest group of the population. The poorest households in the richest regions (Midwest, South and Southeast) had the highest income commitments. Socioeconomic inequalities in spending and income commitment to dental care are evident. Assessing these inequalities is important for evaluating and guiding public health policies.
30043849	The current process of intensification of work is part of the context of productive transformations in Brazil since the 1990s, leading to changes in the social production of worker burnout and the epidemiological profile of workers. Inability to work due to accidents and illnesses is an important indicator of worker attrition and is of interest to the health sector. The study aims to analyze the process of intensification of work and health from the perspective of the health-disease process, based on the perception of workers at an automobile manufacturer in the ABC region of São Paulo, when asked about the obstacles to returning to work for those with work restrictions due to accident or illness, commonly referred to as "compatible". We carried out six visits to the factory and twenty interviews with production workers. The data was collected between March 2010 and November 2014. The results reveal, in the social figure of the "compatible", a fracture exposed by the production process, expressed in the practices of work intensification, characterized by intense pace, increased workload, longer working hours and stress management; at the same time, they point to the tendency to exclude the "compatible" worker from the company. The research contributes to advancing the search for knowledge about the intensification of work and health, and we hope to have provided input for further investigations from the perspective of determining the health-disease process, incorporating the experience of workers.
30043850	The aim of this study was to evaluate the program for the use of palivizumab immunoglobulin in the state of São Paulo, Brazil. The evaluation framework proposed by Donabedian was adopted, and the data was discussed based on the recommendations of the Ordinance regulating the use of palivizumab in the national network and the Manual of Vaccination Standards and Procedures. The 16 vaccination sites in the state were included, as well as 693 children/mothers enrolled in the program in 2014 (85.1% of the eligible population). To assess the structure and process, scores were created to classify the sites as adequate, partially adequate and inadequate, when there were up to 10%, 11-20% and more than 20% non-compliance, respectively. For the outcome assessment, an association was sought between failure to take palivizumab and the need for hospitalization due to respiratory disease/symptoms, based on point and interval odds ratios, with a 95% confidence interval and critical p-value < 0.05. Of the 11 clinics whose structure was classified as adequate, only two had an adequate process, four had an inadequate process and five had a partially adequate process. The risk of ICU hospitalization due to respiratory disease/symptom increased by an average of 30% with each failure (p = 0.003; OR = 1.30; 95%CI: 1.09-1.55). We conclude that having a favorable immunoglobulin program structure in the state of São Paulo did not necessarily result in an adequate process. In general, the structure was better than the process. The use of all doses of immunoglobulin was shown to be relevant for preventing hospitalization due to respiratory disease/symptoms.
30043853	Pre-sexual exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) has been considered strategic and promising for controlling the HIV epidemic globally. However, it is necessary to transpose the knowledge accumulated by efficacy and demonstration studies to the reality of the services and the populations most vulnerable to infection, in order to achieve broad coverage of PrEP. We propose a reflection on this challenge focusing on two dimensions: the users of prophylaxis, with an emphasis on the contexts of practice and potential exposure to HIV; the comparative advantages of prophylaxis in relation to other methods and the challenges for protective and safe use; and the services, considering the organizational principles that could make the offer and incorporation of PrEP more successful, as part of combined prevention strategies. We analyzed how some principles - uniqueness in care, autonomy to choose and non-hierarchization of methods, sexual risk management and flexibility in scheduling and the complementarity of a multi-professional team - can favor the organization of services and care, facilitating the linkage and retention of users. Some considerations were made about the relative incompatibility between the existing structure of the services and the Ministry of Health's guidelines for offering PrEP. It was concluded that the greater success of PrEP as a public health policy depends on two central aspects: ensuring that services are culturally diverse and free from discrimination, and intensifying community interventions, including social networks, in order to reduce inequalities in access to services and PrEP.
30043898	To develop an instrument to assess reading comprehension and to verify the influence of receptive vocabulary on the reading comprehension of typical 3rd, 4th and 5th graders. All ethical requirements were met. Sixty-nine 3rd, 4th and 5th grade students took part in the study, with an average age of 8.2, 9.2 and 10 years, respectively, 35 of them girls, who had a typical score on the School Performance Test. Half of the sample took the reading comprehension test using the question and answer method, and the other half took the test using the Cloze technique. All the students took the USP Picture Vocabulary Test with 139 stimuli. The students performed well in receptive vocabulary, despite their low socioeconomic status. The students performed better on explicit questions than on implicit ones. They showed a more homogeneous and similar performance between school years in the Cloze technique. There were no conclusive results regarding the correlation between receptive vocabulary and reading comprehension using the two methods. There is evidence of the influence of vocabulary on reading comprehension, especially in the question and answer method. The instrument developed, including two reading comprehension assessment methods, is efficient for investigating and characterizing textual reading comprehension in typical 3rd, 4th and 5th graders, and both methods significantly differentiated 3rd and 5th graders.
30043899	To investigate the auditory perception of lay judges regarding the gender of women with Reinke's edema, related to the degree of edema and the fundamental frequency of the voice. Observational, analytical and cross-sectional study. 46 lay judges took part and analyzed 48 dysphonic voices - 24 voices of women with Reinke's edema (Reinke's edema group - GER) and 24 voices of women and men with other types of dysphonia (control group - GC). The judges analyzed the number count from 1 to 10 and judged the voices as belonging to men or women, as well as describing whether they were sure or unsure of the answer. The results of the GER were associated with the Degree of Edema (1, 2 or 3) and the average fundamental frequency (F0), analyzed using the vowel /Ɛ/. It was observed that the percentage of errors regarding gender was higher in GER when compared to CG, and the percentage of certainty regarding gender was higher in CG. In GER, grade 1 edema caused fewer errors when compared to grades 2 and 3. The average F0 of women whose voices were judged to be male (141 Hz) was lower than those who were correctly identified (149 Hz). Through the evaluation of lay judges, the voices of women with Reinke's edema are identified as male voices. The increase in the degree of edema and the reduction in F0 are related to the greater number of errors and/or doubts regarding the identification of the gender of women with Reinke's edema.
30043900	to report a series of cases of robotic bariatric surgery in the treatment of obesity in Brazil. patients who underwent robotic bariatric surgery at the Garrido Institute were evaluated, and a comparison was made with the group who underwent conventional laparoscopic surgery. 45 patients were analyzed, with a mean age of 39.44 years, 34 of whom were female, with a mean initial BMI of 41.26Kg/m2. Of the surgeries performed, 91.11% were Roux-en-Y gastric bypasses, while 8.89% were vertical gastrectomies. The average total surgery time was 158 (±56.54) minutes, with an average docking time of 7.93 (±3.9) minutes and a console time of 113.0 (±41.4) minutes. The average pain score in post-anesthetic recovery was 2.61 (±3.30) points, on a scale of 0 to 10, with four patients showing mild signs of nausea and responding well to drug treatment. Only one patient required ICU admission for a period of two days after surgery, due to previous heart disease. In two cases there was an incisional hernia at the trocar site, which was treated surgically without further complications. In the comparison between the robotic and laparoscopic surgery groups, 45 patients were selected for each group. The operative time was significantly longer in the robotic approach, with most of the other variables being equivalent, including post-operative control of comorbidities. robotic bariatric surgery is a safe procedure, with results comparable to laparoscopic surgery.
30043901	to identify physicians' knowledge of intra-abdominal hypertension and abdominal compartment syndrome and compare it with the approach established in the literature. a quantitative, descriptive, observational, cross-sectional study. 38 doctors were interviewed using a self-administered questionnaire made up of objective questions. The study was carried out in a tertiary referral university hospital located in Curitiba, Paraná. The average age of the participants was 28 years, 60.5% were female and the average length of medical experience was 3.5 years. With regard to knowledge on the subject, 57.9% considered that abdominal compartment syndrome begins with grade III intra-abdominal hypertension, 50% considered abdominal perfusion pressure to be the most reliable method for determining intra-abdominal hypertension, 89.4% considered the intravesical measurement technique to be the most widely used, 71.1% considered oliguria to be an early sign of abdominal compartment syndrome. 81.6% of those interviewed did not measure intra-abdominal pressure, as there was no protocol defined by the service. Seventy-nine percent of those interviewed said they did not know the definitions of the World Society of the Abdominal Compartment Syndrome (WSACS) consensus. Half of the doctors were able to correctly classify intra-abdominal hypertension and indicate the onset of abdominal compartment syndrome.
30043928	To evaluate the effectiveness of telephone-based educational interventions on the duration and exclusivity of breastfeeding. Systematic literature review, including only Randomized Clinical Trials. The exposure factor was a telephone-based educational intervention, and the outcomes were breastfeeding duration and exclusivity. Literature in Portuguese, English and Spanish published between 2010 and 2016 was searched in Cochrane, Lilacs, Medline and Scopus. The articles were analyzed by synthesizing the results. A total of 241 articles were identified, of which 231 did not meet the inclusion criteria, so only 10 articles were reviewed. Four studies showed no efficacy related to breastfeeding. As common characteristics, these studies were carried out over short periods and by peers. The others showed efficacy in the duration and/or exclusivity of breastfeeding. The latter were mostly long-term intervention studies carried out by lactation consultant nurses. The evidence shows that the telephone is a viable technology for promoting breastfeeding, providing health units and professionals with an alternative that can contribute to mother-baby care.
30043929	To describe the process of building an intervention in the form of a nursing care program for adolescents, aimed at preventing and controlling overweight/obesity at school. This was a methodological study, developed using Intervention Mapping, in Natal/RN, Brazil, between October 2015 and September 2016, with the participation of adolescents, public school teachers and primary care nurses. The data sources were focus groups, interviews and an integrative review. Collective Subject Discourse was used in the analysis. At the end of the six stages of the Intervention Mapping, the "School Health Nursing Program" was built, to be implemented over 10 months, with five weekly exercise classes and one weekly session of nursing interventions, detailed in the Program. The nursing intervention guided by the Intervention Mapping allows for actions based on theories, community participation, school/service links and continuity of care.
30043930	To describe and interpret the experience of breastfeeding among women who underwent breast augmentation surgery before becoming mothers. This is a descriptive study with a qualitative approach, carried out with women treated at a Human Milk Bank between 2014 and 2015. Data analysis was based on the content analysis method and the Interactive Breastfeeding Theory. Thirteen women took part. Four categories emerged: (In)Success in Exclusive Breastfeeding: influence of the mother's and child's biological conditions; Maternal feelings: perception of breastfeeding; Decision-making on continuing breastfeeding or using supplements; Role of health professionals in protecting, promoting and supporting breastfeeding: (Dis)Information on the implications of surgery. The unfavorable biological conditions of the women who underwent mammoplasty led to unsuccessful experiences with exclusive breastfeeding and limited their decision-making, despite their desire to breastfeed.
30043931	"Brave New World" foresaw a society dominated by scientific and technological progress that went so far as to subjugate and dehumanize human beings. The future predicted in this book is not far from what we are experiencing today. Considering that nursing is affected and challenged by these technological transformations, this article aims to discuss the present and future of nursing in a society undergoing constant technological change. In the midst of a whole technological apparatus, in which fundamental procedures are beginning to be carried out by machines, nursing needs to start reflecting on what would be its best stance or its differential in a world with a strong tendency towards technological domination. The transformations of the future are still uncertain, but they will drastically change the way individuals relate to themselves, to each other and to health services. However, even in the midst of the uncertainties arising from the technological and scientific advances of the present and the future, the nature of nursing, essentially based on human interactions, can guarantee a prominent place for this profession in society.
30043941	To analyze the association between the occurrence of pruritus and adherence to the prescribed diet, biochemical indicators of renal function and the quality of hemodialysis in chronic renal failure patients. This is a cross-sectional study carried out in a dialysis clinic in the northeast of Brazil, with 200 patients undergoing hemodialysis in the first half of 2015. Inferential statistics were used to analyze the data, using the chi-square and Fisher's exact tests, and the Mann-Whitney U-test. Pruritus was present in 51% of the sample and was statistically associated with phosphorus consumption (P=0.024) and elevated serum calcium (P=0.009). Pruritus in chronic kidney patients undergoing hemodialysis is influenced by failure to adhere adequately to the prescribed diet, as well as elevated biochemical indicators of kidney function.
30043942	To describe the epidemiological characteristics of perinatal deaths due to actions taken by the Public Health System. Descriptive study with time analysis, population composed of perinatal deaths of mothers living in Recife, 2010-2014. A list of preventable causes of death was used to classify preventability and EpiInfo version 7 was used to analyze the variables. There were 1,756 perinatal deaths (1,019 fetal and 737 early neonatal), with a reduction in early neonatal deaths (-15.8%) and an increase in fetal deaths (12.1%). The main causes were: fetus and newborn affected by maternal illness and asphyxia/hypoxia at birth. Most of the deaths were preventable and were concentrated in the group of adequate care provided to women during pregnancy. Gaps in the care provided to women during childbirth explain the percentage of asphyxia/hypoxia. Reducing avoidable perinatal mortality is associated with increasing access to and quality of care to ensure promotion, prevention, treatment and specific and timely care.
30043943	To identify theoretical references and instruments for assessing critical thinking in order to support studies in nursing and education. Integrative review, with a search for scientific articles in Portuguese, English and Spanish, in the LILACS, SCIELO, IBECS, MEDLINE/PubMed and SCOPUS databases, using the descriptors: "thinking", "teaching" and "nursing" or the respective terms in English. A total of 3147 articles were found; 23 articles published between 2010 and 2015 were selected. 14 (60.2%) of the studies analyzed used Facione's framework to support their research. We identified 8 (34.4%) studies using different critical thinking assessment tools applied to nursing and education. Most of the studies analyzed used Facione's framework. Of the assessment instruments, the California Critical Thinking Skills Test (CCTST) and the Watson - Glaser Critical Thinking Appraisal stood out; in relation to critical thinking skills, both focus their assessment on cognitive critical thinking skills.
30043944	To understand the scientific production on nurses working in oncology as patient navigators, Nurse Navigators. Integrative review with searches in the LILACS, MEDLINE/PubMed, SCOPUS, SciELO, Web of Science and Science Direct databases, using the descriptors: patient; navigation; nurse; professional; cancer; oncology; navigator and navigators. Seventeen articles were identified. These were grouped according to their thematic approach: Care Processes; Patients; and Health Professionals. It emerged that the scientific knowledge produced on Nurse Navigators is concentrated in the United States, Australia, Canada, Sweden and Denmark, the countries where the first Patient Navigation Programs were implemented. There were no studies published in local journals or populations. The role of the Nurse navigator provides a differential in the quality of care provided. Although international research on the subject is recent, it is clear that there is still a need for more studies on the role of this professional.
30043945	To verify the adequacy of the roles and functions performed by higher education professionals in the psychosocial care network services of a capital city in the Northeast of Brazil. This is an analytical, cross-sectional study with a quantitative approach. The sample consisted of 65 professionals from seven psychosocial care services in Natal, Rio Grande do Norte, Brazil. A questionnaire with closed and semi-open questions was used. The data was analyzed using SPSS version 20.0, using the Chi-square and Fisher's exact tests. A significance level of 5% (p<0.05) was adopted. Inadequate care was found for family groups (52.3%), specialized training in mental health (69.2%; p=0.02) and working conditions in the services (87.7%). The roles and functions carried out by the professionals in the services surveyed were in line with the purpose of these services, although they faced numerous difficulties.
30043946	To analyze the conceptions of nursing professionals working in Basic Health Units regarding the detection and prevention of elderly people who have been raped. This is a descriptive, exploratory, qualitative study. Conducted in two UBS, Mossoró/RN, using a semi-structured interview script, between March and August 2013. The sample consisted of four nurses and six nursing technicians. Content analysis was carried out. Four categories were identified: Strategies used to identify violence against the elderly; Types of violence against the elderly; Conduct used after suspecting violence; SUS and the problem of violence against the elderly. Many professionals recognize/distrust possible cases, but don't know how to proceed. The scale of the problem requires pragmatic interventions in the clinical environment and in the social context. There is a need for ongoing education for professionals and greater communication between the bodies responsible for reporting and receiving cases.
30043947	To analyze the structure and content of nurses' social representations of domestic violence against women. This qualitative study was carried out with 100 nurses between May and September 2014 in two hospitals in Rio Grande/RS. Data was collected through free recall and semi-structured interviews. They were processed using Evoc software and contextual analysis, respectively. A negative representation was observed, with nuclear elements alluding to the forms of violence and their judgment, expressed in "physical aggression" and "disrespect". On the periphery, "fear" reveals the feelings of both the professionals and the victims towards the aggressor, and "submission" is mentioned as the cause of the violence. We can infer the possibility of a sub-group with a differentiated representation of the term "verbal aggression" in the contrast zone. The view centered on physical injuries and victim blaming can limit care actions, so it is essential to problematize this issue with health professionals.
30043948	To analyze the understanding of municipal health managers about public policies aimed at the elderly population and how they are implemented in the municipality. This was a qualitative study carried out with 14 municipal health managers. Data was collected through semi-structured interviews and analyzed according to the precepts of content analysis. The results show that municipal health managers lack knowledge about public policies for caring for the elderly. Also, the care provided to the elderly in the municipalities studied focuses on measures to control health problems. The municipalities do not have specific health care policies for the elderly population. Thus, these results can provide food for thought about care for the elderly in health services, its relationship with legislation and the applicability of public health policies.
30043949	To identify and compare the structure and content of representations of domestic violence against women among students in the initial and final grades of an undergraduate nursing course. This was a qualitative study, carried out between August and November 2014, in Rio Grande/RS, with 132 nursing students, 71 of whom were in the initial series and 61 in the final series. Data was collected through evocations and interviews; EVOC software and content analysis were used for processing. Approval under Opinion 109/2014. Common terms in the central nucleus were violence, cowardice, disrespect and pain. The first group also evoked sadness and the second physical violence. The representation has a negative connotation, with slight differentiation. The students in the final grades are based on reified knowledge and have a structured representation, with a concept, image and attitude. It is hoped that this will help students to prevent, identify and intervene with victims of violence.
30043950	To construct qualitative indicators of results in Psychosocial Care related to autonomy from the perspective of users and their families. This is an evaluative case study with a hermeneutic-dialectic theoretical framework in a Psychosocial Care Center in Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil. The first stage of data collection, February-July 2014, consisted of constructing indicators based on the analysis of qualitative data from two evaluative surveys in this same service. The second stage, August-September 2014, validated the indicators constructed through focus groups with nine users and nine family members. The participants pointed to three qualitative indicators related to their autonomy as a result of joining the service: improved self-management of income, better development of daily activities and greater negotiating power. The methodology used proved to be suitable for creating qualitative indicators from the perspective of users and family members, as well as pointing out that the service helps in the process of achieving autonomy.
30043951	To assess occupational stress among healthcare workers at a university hospital. This is a cross-sectional study of nursing and medical health workers at a university hospital in southern Brazil. Data was collected between August 2011 and August 2012 using a characterization questionnaire and the Job Stress Scale. A descriptive and univariate analysis (Kruskal-Wallis) was carried out. The participants showed high demand and high control over their work and low social support, indicating active work. Nurses had less control over their work (p<0.001) and doctors received more social support (p=0.006). Reduced social support was related to greater exposure to stress among nursing assistants and technicians (p=0.012). Workers who perceived reduced social support had greater exposure to stress. It is necessary to implement strategies to prevent stress among health workers, such as strengthening social support at work.
30043952	To develop a conceptual framework that explains how elderly people from different cultures experience ageing, formulate concepts and attribute values to the process of growing old. This was a qualitative study carried out with 33 elderly people in a municipality on the Triple Frontier. The data was collected between February and August 2011, using Symbolic Interactionism and Grounded Theory as the theoretical-methodological strategy. The central theme "Having to grow old: sociocultural practices guiding ageing in different ethnic groups" was identified, consisting of sub-processes that characterize the structural concepts of the study: Old age conceived by multifactors (physical, biopsychic and sociocultural); Experiencing ageing in the process of cultural adaptation; Experiencing ageing as the continuity of life; Redefining social roles and; Culture influencing habits and customs in health care. The experience of growing old proved to be a unique process for each individual and the values attributed to it are influenced by culture.
30056460	This study aimed to verify the history of orthodontic treatment and its associated factors. This cross-sectional study was conducted in the city of Passo Fundo, Brazil, with a representative sample of adolescents regularly enrolled in high school, aged between 15 and 19, from 20 schools. A structured questionnaire was applied to access demographic, behavioral and health variables. Associations between history of orthodontic treatment and the independent variables were analyzed using the chi-square or Fisher's exact tests. In addition, multivariate regression with robust variance was performed. 736 students were examined and interviewed. Orthodontic treatment was carried out by 57.6% of the adolescents, while 42.4% of the participants did not mention it. In the multivariate analysis, the following variables were significantly associated with a history of orthodontic treatment: female (PR= 1.26; 95%CI: 1.11-1.43), white (PR= 1.32; 95%CI: 1.11-1.56), mothers with a high level of education (PR=1.49; 95%CI: 1.28-1.74), tooth loss (PR=1.21; 95%CI: 1.06-1.39) and concern for oral health (PR=0.69; 95%CI: 0.61-0.78). Attending a private school was not significantly associated with a history of orthodontic treatment (p>0.05). This study showed that high levels of orthodontic treatment history are found in adolescents and this is associated with gender, ethnicity, high education level of the adolescent's mother and tooth loss. Concern about oral health was shown to be a protective factor for orthodontic treatment.
30056461	The aim of this study was to evaluate the cytotoxic effects of 2.5% sodium hypochlorite (NaOCl), 17% ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) and 1% peracetic acid (PAA) on human fibroblasts. The FG11 and FG15 cell lines were colonized in 24-well cell plates to assess cell proliferation and in 96-well cell plates for the MTT assay; Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) was used as a control. The experimental solutions were used at dilutions of 0.01%, 0.05% and 0.1% and evaluated 1, 2 and 4 hours apart. The data was subjected to statistical analysis by two-way ANOVA, followed by the Bonferroni test with a significance level ofp <0.05. The evaluation of cell proliferation in this study showed 2.5% NaOCL to be cytotoxic in the 3 dilutions and 3 time intervals, 17% EDTA in the 0.05% and 0.1% dilutions at the 2 and 4 hour intervals, and 1% PAA in all dilutions at the 4 hour interval. The cell viability test (MTT) showed 2.5% NaOCl to be cytotoxic at 0.05% and 0.1% at all intervals, 17% EDTA cytotoxic at 0.1% dilutions at 2 and 4 hour intervals and 1% PAA cytotoxic at 0.1% dilution at 2 and 4 hour intervals. In conclusion, PAA at 1% was less cytotoxic than NaOCl at 2.5%> and EDTA at 17%>.
30056462	The aim of this study was to identify the relationship between the instruments used to screen and diagnose patients with temporomandibular dysfunction (TMD). A retrospective study was carried out using dental records of patients treated for pain and dysfunction in the temporomandibular joint, who had come to the institution for an initial assessment between January and December 2015. Medical history and physical examination data were collected, particularly those that focused on the diagnosis of TMD. The following instruments were used to assess the severity of TMD signs and symptoms: the Fonseca Anamnestic Index (FAI); the Helkimo Index (HI); the American Association of Orofacial Pain Questionnaire (AAOPQ) and the Joint Symptoms and Oral Habits Questionnaire (JSOHQ). Thirty-eight patient records were included, with a prevalence of women (84.6%) and a mean age of 37.42 ± 14.32 years. Patients who were classified as having severe TMD by the FAI had a higher number of positive responses on the AAOPQ (6.25 ± 1.42; ANOVA F = 15.82), with a statistically significant difference compared to patients with mild TMD (3.0 ± 1.22; p < 0.01). A positive correlation (r = 0.78; p < 0.01) was found between the number of positive responses on the AAOPQ and the sum of the scores on the JSOHQ. Patients who were classified as having severe TMD on the FAI had higher scores on the JSOHO (18.58 ± 4.96/ANOVA F = 14.43), with a statistically significant difference when compared to patients with medium (12.08 ± 5.64; p <0.01) and mild (7.46 ± 4.89; p <0.01) TMD. In the sample studied, there was congruence between the instruments used to differentiate between patients with severe and mild TMD. The selection of instruments should be rational in order to improve the quality of the results.
30064145	To evaluate the relationship between the use of psychoactive substances during pregnancy and the occurrence of severe maternal morbidity (SMM), perinatal outcomes and repercussions on the neuropsychomotor development of exposed children. METHODS: Case-control study based on a cohort of severe maternal morbidity (COMMAG). Women with MMG were considered cases. Controls were women with low-risk pregnancies admitted during the same period as the cases. The cohort data was collected retrospectively from hospitalization records for delivery and face-to-face interviews conducted with 638 women and their children from the index pregnancy, between 6 months and 5 years after delivery. In the interview, substance use during pregnancy was assessed with a modified question introduced in the Alcohol, Tobacco and Other Substance Use Screening Questionnaire 2.0 (ASSIST) and the neuropsychomotor development of the children was assessed using the Denver II developmental screening test. The prevalence of licit or illicit drug use during pregnancy was around 17%. Of the users, 63.9% used alcohol, 58.3% used tobacco, 9.2% used cocaine/crack and 4.6% used marijuana. There was no association between drug use during pregnancy and MMG. However, tobacco use was associated with hemorrhage, the presence of clinical criteria for <i>near miss</i> and altered child development. Alcohol use was associated with neonatal asphyxia and cocaine/crack use with the occurrence of some clinical complication during pregnancy. CONCLUSION: The abuse of licit or illicit substances during pregnancy is frequent and associated with worse maternal, perinatal and child development outcomes.
30066724	To assess hearing thresholds at high frequencies, comparing responses between ears, to check the correlation between hearing level and increasing age, and to analyze responses by frequency for normal-hearing adults. This was a prospective, quantitative, cross-sectional study with a convenience sample. The sample consisted of 60 subjects aged between 18 and 58 years, with a mean age of 25.8 years, hearing thresholds within the normal range from 250 to 8000 Hz and normal results in acoustic immittance measurements. Interacoustics model AS10 HF equipment with KOSS R/80 headphones and thresholds expressed in dBNPS was used to study the high frequencies. As for hearing thresholds, there was an increase for the right ear, with statistical significance at 10, 11 and 14 kHz and a tendency towards significance at 13 kHz, and from the frequency of 14 kHz there was a progressive increase directly proportional to the frequency bilaterally and the older the subjects, the higher the thresholds for all frequencies. High-frequency hearing thresholds become higher with a progressive increase proportional to frequency and age in normal-hearing individuals, with higher values for the right ear.
30066731	The ANDROMEDA-SHOCK study is an international, multicenter, randomized controlled trial comparing peripheral perfusion-guided resuscitation with lactate-guided resuscitation in patients with septic shock, with the aim of testing the hypothesis that peripheral perfusion-guided resuscitation is associated with lower morbidity and mortality. To report the statistical analysis plan for the ANDROMEDA-SHOCK study. We describe the study design, primary and secondary objectives, patients, randomization methods, interventions, outcomes and sample size. We describe our statistical analysis plans for the primary, secondary and tertiary outcomes. We also describe the subgroup and sensitivity analyses. Finally, we provide details for the presentation of the results, including table models to present the baseline characteristics, the evolution of the hemodynamic and perfusion variables, and the effects of the treatments on the outcomes. In line with best research practice, we report our statistical analysis plan and data management plan before closing the database and starting data analysis. Our expectation is that this procedure will prevent bias in the analysis and increase the usefulness of the reported results.
30066736	to create a multidisciplinary routine manual for tracheostomy procedures for adult and pediatric patients at the Amazonas State Oncology Control Center Foundation. the protocol was developed using the modified Delphi method, which consisted of applying two sets of questionnaires to 20 professionals at the unit. thirteen professionals completed the two stages. In the first stage, 53 of the 92 questions presented reached a consensus (57.6%). These consensus sentences formed the text of the second stage, which was divided into eight chapters that were evaluated by marking the answers offered on a Linkert scale. All the chapters presented in the second stage achieved consensus, meaning that the sum of the answers agree and strongly agree were all above 70%. Using the data obtained from the consensus, a protocol for tracheostomy procedures and a manual of care guidelines for patients and their caregivers were drawn up.
30066737	to study the efficacy and safety of subconjunctival triamcinolone acetate alone or in combination with mitomycin C as a modulator of trabeculectomy healing in rabbits. thirty male albino New Zealand rabbits underwent bilateral trabeculectomy. The animals were divided into four experimental groups with 15 eyes per group: control, mitomycin C, triamcinolone acetate and triamcinolone acetate + mitomycin C. Flattening tonometry and clinical analysis of the bleb using the Moorfields Grading System were obtained postoperatively. To assess healing, quantitative analysis of the inflammatory infiltrate (polymorphonuclear cells) was carried out using Hematoxylin & Eosin staining and vascular proliferation using immunohistochemistry. a significant reduction in post-operative intraocular pressure compared to pre-operative pressure was observed in all groups (p<0.001). However, there was no difference between the groups (p=0.186). The triamcinolone acetate + mitomycin C group showed better indices for maximum bleb height and vascularization of the central area of the bleb (p=0.001); in addition, there was less inflammatory response (p=0.001) and less vascular proliferation (p=0.001) in the middle phase of the study compared to the monotherapies. the association of mitomycin C with triamcinolone acetate resulted in a synergistic action between these agents, with larger and more diffuse blisters and less inflammatory infiltrate and vascular proliferation in the intermediate stage of follow-up in this animal model.
30066738	Inadequate treatment of postoperative pain in laparoscopic cholecystectomy can lead to delayed mobilization, patient dissatisfaction, delayed hospital discharge and the development of chronic pain. The aim of this study was to identify the best therapeutic strategy available to anesthesiologists in the management of acute postoperative pain in patients undergoing elective laparoscopic cholecystectomy. This is a systematic review that included 36 full articles indexed in the Medline, Scopus, Web of Science and LILACS databases, with a time frame of five years (2012 to 2016), resulting from controlled and randomized studies that were subjected to qualitative analysis. In a multimodal analgesia proposal, it is important to consider contraindications, adverse effects, dose and the ideal timing of interventions. Non-opioid drugs are used, such as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)/cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors, gabapentin/pregabalin, N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonists, among others. Opioids can be used in low doses associated or not with multimodal therapy and/or restricted to cases where non-opioid multimodal analgesia is insufficient. In conclusion, there is no consensus on the best analgesic strategy to implement in acute postoperative pain after laparoscopic cholecystectomy, which requires individualized application based on the scientific evidence found in the literature. The contributions to teaching and professional practice include theoretical enrichment of the analgesic drug options available for the treatment of postoperative pain in patients undergoing elective laparoscopic cholecystectomy, as well as alerting the team to consider the adverse effects of the interventions implemented.
30066818	To describe a case of congenital syphilis with late diagnosis and to identify the missed opportunities in the various phases/levels of health care that delayed diagnosis. A boy, 34 days old, was referred to a tertiary hospital from the Basic Health Unit due to increased abdominal volume and progressive jaundice for 2 weeks, fecal hypocolia, hepatosplenomegaly, anemia, thrombocytopenia and elevated liver enzymes. Physical examination revealed erythematous scaly lesions on the hands and feet and macular rash in the inguinal region, ascites, palpable liver 5 cm from the right costal margin and palpable spleen 3 cm from the left costal margin. Infant serology: CMIA (microparticle chemiluminescence) reagent, VDRL (Venereal Diseases Research Laboratory) 1:1024 and TPHA (Treponema pallidum Hemagglutination) reagent. Maternal serology: CMIA and TPHA reactive, VDRL 1:256. X-rays of the long bones showed symmetrical periostitis; periosteal lifting; and lucent metaphyseal bands in the femurs, humerus, ulnae and tibiae. After treatment with crystalline penicillin, he showed clinical and laboratory improvement and was discharged on the 18th day of hospitalization. This case shows that late diagnosis of congenital syphilis still occurs due to shortcomings in prevention strategies, both in primary care and at secondary and tertiary levels. Applying the interventions recommended by the Ministry of Health and identifying situations in which there are failures in their implementation are important for evaluating routine care at all levels of care and in the various units responsible for caring for newborns and young infants.
30066819	To verify the relationship between vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene polymorphisms and clinical signs and vitamin D (VD) levels in asthmatics. This was a cross-sectional study of 77 children aged between 7 and 14 years from a specialized outpatient clinic, divided into 3 groups: asthmatics who had been using inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) for more than a year; asthmatics who did not need ICS; non-asthmatics and non-allergics (according to the International Study of Asthma and Allergies in Childhood - ISAAC. Spirometry, allergy tests, the presence of the CDX2 polymorphism of the RVD promoter by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and genotyping of polymorphisms of exons 2 and 3 by PCR-SSCA (single-strand conformational analysis), total immunoglobulin E (IgE) and specific IgE to dust mites and grasses in the three groups studied were evaluated. Levels of 25-hydroxyvitamin D were measured in asthmatics. The mean age was 10.8±2.2 years, 57% male, 38 asthmatics with ICS, 22 without ICS and 17 non-asthmatics. Allergic rhinitis was present in 90% of asthmatics, CDX2 polymorphism in 23% of asthmatics and absent in controls (p=0.03). Lower levels of forced expiratory volume in the first second (FEV1%) were observed in asthmatics homozygous for CDX2 (p=0.001). Variations in the sequences of exons 2 and 3 were not related to asthma or other tests. RV deficiency or insufficiency was diagnosed in 98% of asthmatics. There was no association between RV levels and genetic polymorphisms of exons 2 and 3. There was a positive association between CDX2 polymorphism in homozygosity with asthma and lower FEV1% values. CDX2 may modify the cellular interaction of RVD with the vitamin, as well as being associated with asthma and difficulty in controlling the disease.
30066820	To verify the profile and appropriateness of antibacterial use in hospitalized children. Cross-sectional study. An analysis was made of all children who used antibacterials during hospitalization from January to December 2015, in a large private philanthropic hospital in southern Brazil. The information was obtained by reviewing the medical records and included demographic data (age, gender, race and body weight) and clinical data (reason for hospitalization, use of antibacterials and clinical outcome). Descriptive statistics were used. Of the 318 patients included, 61.3% were male. The age range varied from 2 to 11 years (mean: 5.8±2.9 years). The prevalence of antibacterial use was 24.4% considering the total of 1,346 children who were hospitalized. The median length of stay was four days. The main reason for hospitalization was clinical and the most prescribed antibacterial was cefazolin, with the intravenous route being predominant. Regarding the use of antibacterials, 62.2% had antibacterial prescriptions that were considered adequate. Underdosing and overdosing accounted for 11.7 and 14.6% of the patients included, respectively. As for administration intervals, 8% were characterized as long and 3.5% as short. Although the prevalence of antibacterial use in hospitalized children was not that high, a considerable part of the sample showed inadequate use of this type of medication, considering the dose and interval of use. This data is a cause for concern regarding the development of bacterial resistance and the occurrence of adverse reactions.
30066821	To assess whether there was an association between the occurrence of fractures after physical trauma and the use of glucocorticoids in the 12 months prior to the trauma, in children and adolescents treated in an emergency department. From April to October 2015, a case-control study was carried out in a pediatric emergency department on patients aged between 3 and 14 years who had suffered physical trauma, with and without fractures. The data analyzed was obtained by consulting medical records, physical examination of the patients and interviews with their guardians, comparing the use of glucocorticoids in the last 12 months, demographic characteristics, body mass index, milk intake, intensity of the trauma, physical exercise and passive smoking at home in the two groups of patients. The study included 104 patients with physical trauma, 50 with a fracture and 54 without. The use of glucocorticoids occurred in 15.4% of the patients studied, with no statistically significant difference between the two groups. The age group of 10 to 14 incomplete years, severe trauma and the practice of physical exercise predominated among the patients with fractures. This study showed no association between previous use of glucocorticoids and the occurrence of fractures in children and adolescents. The age group of 10 to 14 incomplete years, severe trauma and physical exercise were associated with a higher risk of fractures.
30066822	To analyze the clinical, laboratory and histopathological characteristics and the pathway to diagnosis and treatment of patients with adrenal carcinoma (ARC). This is a retrospective study of 13 patients treated at the pediatric oncology service of the Hospital das Clínicas of the Federal University of Minas Gerais (HC-UFMG) between 2004 and 2015. Age at diagnosis ranged from 1.0 to 14.8 years (median: 2.0 years). Manifestations of hypercortisolism were identified in all the cases, and virilization in all the girls. All the patients met the Weiss criteria for a histopathological diagnosis of RSC. Immunohistochemistry was performed in 61.5% of the cases. Most patients had stage I disease (76.9%). All underwent total tumor resection. Two patients (stages III and IV) received chemotherapy associated with mitotane. The only death observed was of a patient with stage IV disease. The probability of overall survival for the whole group at 5.0 years was 92.3±7.4%. The median time between symptom onset and diagnosis was 9.5 months, and 6.0 months between the first consultation and the start of treatment. The low age at diagnosis, the predominance of cases with localized disease and complete tumor resection - with only one case of tumor capsule rupture - are possibly the explanation for the favorable evolution of the population studied. The long time between the onset of symptoms and diagnosis suggests the importance of training pediatricians in the early recognition of signs and symptoms of RSC.
30066823	To develop waist circumference cut-off points according to pubertal stage to identify overweight in adolescents. This is a longitudinal study, approved by the Research Ethics Committee, with 557 adolescents, aged 10 to 15, selected from public schools. Waist, arm, neck and hip circumference, fat percentage, body mass, height and blood pressure were measured. The Tanner scale self-assessment was used to determine sexual maturation. The ROC curve (Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve) was applied to determine: predictive power, sensitivity, specificity and waist circumference cut-off points for identifying overweight. There was a positive correlation between waist circumference and body mass, body mass index (BMI), arm and hip circumference, waist/hip ratio and blood pressure in both sexes. The cut-off points for waist circumference according to pubertal staging to identify overweight that performed best on the ROC curve were: 71.65 cm for prepubertal girls, 67.90 cm for pubertal girls, 70.25 cm for post-pubertal girls and 66.45 cm for pubertal boys. Age, body mass, height, BMI, fat percentage, arm circumference and hip circumference were considered predictors of altered waist circumference. The cut-off points for waist circumference according to pubertal staging showed excellent performance for identifying overweight and can be considered reliable for the Brazilian adolescent population, since using only chronological age in adolescence can underestimate nutritional status.
34075261	Global digital connectivity offers new opportunities for multinational companies, but also brings unique risks, an area not yet well examined in international business. This article presents a model of organizational information processing, which elucidates what (types and sources of risk), how (risk assessment and management) and with whom (vulnerable companies) these risks relate, in a dialectical way that seeks to combine theoretical insights and managerial actions. We focus on three types of risk (digital interdependence, information security and regulatory complexity) that MNEs uniquely face and explain risk factors within and between countries. We document variances among MNEs in their exposure to these risks, proposing that the intensity of information flow, geographic diversity, international strategy and participation in the global platform have strong implications for a firm's exposure to risk and its response. Finally, this model offers essential actions for MNEs, individually and collectively, to manage digital risks, emphasizing processes for building and deploying digital intelligence in pursuit of transnational resilience for international activities that are increasingly becoming digitally connected.
34076063	Treated hypertensive patients assessed only by casual measurement of blood pressure (BP) may be subject to erroneous decisions. To evaluate the behavior of BP by casual and home measurement (MRPA), the behavior of antihypertensive drug classes and the prevalence of white coat hypertension (WCH) and masked uncontrolled hypertension (MCH). Cross-sectional study that evaluated patients through the TeleMRPA platform between 2017 and 2019. Those without medication, on 3 or more medications, taking spironolactone and alpha-2 agonists were excluded. The variables analyzed were: age, gender, body mass index (BMI), number of valid BP measurements, means of systolic BP (SBP) and diastolic BP (DBP) by casual measurement and MRPA, and classes of antihypertensive drugs. Paired and unpaired t-tests and chi-square tests were used. A 5% significance level was adopted. 22,446 patients were selected, of whom 6,731 met the criteria, 61.3% were female, with a mean age of 57.8 (±12.6) years and a mean BMI of 29.0 (±5.1) kg/m2. The mean SBP and DBP values were 6.6 mmHg (p<0.001) and 4.4 mmHg (p<0.001) higher in the casual measure than in the MRPA. BP control rates were 57.0% with casual measurement and 61.3% with MRPA (p<0.001), with a prevalence of HABNC and HMNC of 15.4% and 11.1%, respectively. Blockade of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system occurred 74.6% of the time and 54.8% were on monotherapy. The use of MRPA should be considered in the follow-up of treated hypertensive patients due to the high prevalence of HABNC and HMNC. Antihypertensive drugs behaved differently in home measurements (Arq Bras Cardiol. 2021; [online].ahead print, PP.0-0).
34076064	The beneficial effects of elabela on the cardiovascular system have been demonstrated in studies. To compare the serum levels of elabela in patients with chronic total occlusion (CTO) with control patients with normal coronary arteries and to investigate whether there is a correlation with collateral development. Cross-sectional, prospective study. The study included fifty patients (28.0% women, mean age 61.6±7.3 years) with CTO in at least one coronary vessel and 50 patients (38% women, mean age 60.7±6.38 years) with normal coronary arteries. The patients in the CTO group were divided into two groups: Rentrop 0-1, made up of patients with poor collateral development and Rentrop 2-3, made up of patients with good collateral development. In addition to the patients' age, gender, demographic characteristics and routine laboratory tests, elabella levels were measured. Demographic characteristics and laboratory values were similar in both groups. While the mean NT-proBNP and troponin levels were higher in the CTO group, the mean elabella level was lower (p<0.05 for all). In the multivariate regression analysis, NT-proBNP and elabella levels were found to be independent predictors for CTO. In addition, the level of elabella was statistically higher in patients in the Rentrop 2-3 group compared to patients in the Rentrop 0-1 group (p<0.05). In our study, we showed that the average elabella level was low in CTO patients compared to normal patients. In addition, we found that the elabella level is lower in patients with poor collateral development compared to patients with good collateral development. (Arq Bras Cardiol. 2021; [online].ahead print, PP.0-0).
34076089	To identify factors associated with a higher probability of survival in men aged 60 and over over almost 15 years. This is a prospective cohort study in which time zero is the year 2000 and whose deaths (final event) were measured up to November 2014. The independent variables were obtained through personal characteristics, childhood life, educational status, lifestyle, social support, work history, socioeconomic status and health status. At the end of the period, 25.8% of the elderly men were still alive, and the factors that stood out for the greatest likelihood of survival were: performing 50% or more of the basic and/or instrumental activities of daily living (95% confidence interval [CI] 0.41 - 0.64), being head of the household (95% CI 0.42 - 0.82), having community participation (95% CI 0.52 - 0.88), being self-employed or a landlord (95% CI 0.54 - 0.88) and owning their own home and movable property (95% CI 0.56 - 0.92). Characteristics related to the autonomy of elderly men, even after almost 15 years, contributed to increasing the likelihood of survival.
34076090	To analyze the different profiles of use of dental services by elderly Brazilians and their possible association with sociodemographic factors, comorbidities, functionality and self-perception of oral health. This is a cross-sectional population-based study using secondary data from the 2013 National Health Survey. The sample consisted of 2,969 elderly people. Latent Class Analysis was used to construct the dependent variable "dental service utilization profile". The independent variables formed three blocks: sociodemographic; comorbidities; and oral health functionalities and self-perception. The Rao-Scott test and Standardized Residuals Analysis tested the association. To measure the effect of covariates, odds ratios were estimated using a multiple hierarchical multinomial logistic regression model. The significance level was 5%. Three latent classes were identified: direct disbursement profile, health insurance profile and Unified Health System (SUS) profile. Elderly white people were associated with the direct disbursement and health insurance profiles. The health insurance profile was more associated with married marital status or living with a spouse. In the multiple model, low schooling was associated with the SUS user profile and elderly people diagnosed with cancer with the health insurance profile. Self-perceived poor or very poor oral health increased the chance of belonging to the SUS profile. Latent Class Analysis proved to be a powerful strategy for a subtle and detailed understanding of the profile of dental service use and its relationship with associated factors.
34076095	Diabetes mellitus is one of the world's most prevalent diseases in adults and is among the main causes of loss of healthy life years, which is worsening with the accelerated ageing of the population in Brazil. This study aims to dimension the problem of diabetes mellitus and its complications and to characterize diabetic health care in Brazil, according to region. Prevalence rates were estimated using a multinomial regression model, and the characterization of health care was based on triangulation between the National Health Survey (PNS), the National Program for Improving Primary Care Access and Quality (PMAQ-AB) and data from the Popular Pharmacy. The prevalence of diabetes mellitus in Brazil was 9.2%, according to the multinomial model, and the corrected PNS prevalence (self-reported + altered glycosylated hemoglobin - HbA1c ≥ 6.5) was 9.4%. The proportion of underreporting of diabetes mellitus in the country was 42.5%, reaching 72.8% in the North. Of those diagnosed, more than half had HbA1c ≥ 6.5. Insufficient fundus examination (40%), with wide regional variation (North 25% - Southeast 52%), is reflected in the high prevalence of retinopathy. Foot examinations were poorly performed (30%) and could lead to more amputations. Around 80% of diabetics used medication, which indicates a high proportion still untreated. Deficiencies in diabetic health care lead to higher morbidity, hospitalizations (15%) and emergency room visits (27% - PMAQ). The scenario presented in 2012, although not ideal, took place in a context of strengthening the Unified Health System (SUS). With the growing prevalence of diabetes mellitus and cuts in investment in public health, we need to reflect on how to control the disease in the coming years.
34076098	Colon and rectal cancer has a high incidence worldwide, but the lethality of the disease is higher in developing countries. The aim of this study was to analyze sociodemographic and clinical factors associated with delays in starting treatment for colon and rectal cancer in hospitals in Brazil. This is a retrospective study using data from hospital cancer registries in Brazil from 2006 to 2015. The outcome analyzed is the time to initiation of treatment for colon and rectal cancer and possible associations between sociodemographic variables and those related to clinical factors. There were disparities in the time taken to start treatment according to sociodemographic strata and geographic regions. There is a greater chance of delay in starting treatment for colon cancer in patients aged over 50, of black race/skin color (OR = 1.50; 95%CI: 1.21-1.84) and brown (OR = 1.28; 95%CI: 1.17-1.42), illiterate (OR = 1.50; 95%CI: 1.19-1.90) or with low schooling and whose treatment took place in a municipality other than their home (OR = 1.25; 95%CI: 1.14-1.38). In patients with rectal cancer, there was a greater chance of delay in starting treatment among those aged over 50, of black race/skin color (OR = 1.44; 95%CI: 1.20-1.72) and brown (OR = 1.29; 95%CI: 1.19-1.39), illiterate (OR = 1.71; 95%CI: 1.40-2.09) or with low schooling and whose treatment took place in a municipality other than their home (OR = 1.35; 95%CI: 1.25-1.47). In conclusion, greater attention should be paid to reducing the time taken to start treatment in disadvantaged regions and in strata identified as having barriers to accessing treatment in a timely manner.
34076099	In recent decades, we have witnessed major transformations in public services, which imply changes in the role of the state as a central agent in the process of regulating public-private relations and defining levels of public funding. Proposals to reform health systems are part of the process of social transformation that has affected different countries. However, the changes in the articulation of the different dimensions are the result of both broad processes of social transformation and specific experiences and times, which are fundamental to understanding the results of this process. In recent decades, the British National Health System (NHS) has undergone the most important reform process since its creation in 1948. This process began with a set of measures implemented by the Conservative government in 1991, but continued with changes made in 1997 and 2002. By analyzing the reform carried out in the NHS, in addition to providing elements that allow us to understand the current debate provided by the initiatives led by Boris Johnson that aim to undertake a new reform in the NHS, starting in 2021, it is possible to find convergences with other proposals for reform of public health systems, which were inspired in their conformation by the British model, as in the case of Brazil, for example. The aim of this article is to discuss and analyze a case of health system reform that can be considered paradigmatic in the development of major trends in the area. The article specifically seeks to analyze the process of reforms carried out in the NHS from the 1990s onwards, and its consequences from the point of view of restructuring the health system.
34076100	The experiences of pregnant women living on the streets have brought tensions between individual guarantees and limits on the state's actions into the arena of public debate. This article analyzes the scientific production on the subject in order to recognize the biomedical, legal and social arguments that support the positions in this debate. Based on an integrative review of national and international databases, 21 studies were analyzed and four statements were identified: Risks to the health of women and fetuses/children; Discourses on prenatal care; Rights of women and fetuses/children; and Meanings about motherhood. The conclusion is that these women's experience of motherhood is extremely complex, not just because of the street situation, but because of the whole context, marked by unequal relations of class, race and gender. On the national and international stage, the discourse of protection and care for the baby/fetus stands out, to the detriment of pregnant women. The criminalization of these maternities has been a global trend in which the expansion of "fetal/infant" rights means the retraction of women's rights. This way of operating does not produce or encourage women to seek out social and health services, but rather the opposite. It becomes an ethical and humanitarian imperative to think of other ways of caring, anchored in the perspective of human rights, so that assistance to the fetus/child does not translate into violence against women.
34076101	To present a proposal for speech therapy rehabilitation called the Chronic Cough Management Therapy Program (CTMT) for the treatment of refractory chronic cough. The TMTC was developed based on two stages: literature analysis and clinical analysis. The literature analysis stage was carried out through the following procedures: electronic and manual search for articles and books published up to June 2019 that included adult participants with chronic cough, and intervention with speech therapy; selection of sources; analysis of the articles and books included; and, elaboration of the initial version of the therapy program. The initial version of the therapy program resulting from the literature analysis stage was submitted to the clinical analysis stage by means of the following procedures: analysis by three judges; review of the proposal by the authors; re-analysis by the judges; preparation of the final version called Therapy Program for Chronic Cough Management (TMTC). The TMTC synthesizes current scientific knowledge and clinical experience on the behavioral management of refractory chronic cough into a program with three main components, each with specific objectives and strategies. The TMTC is made up of four weekly sessions lasting between 30 and 45 minutes per session, carried out in hierarchical phases, with specific objectives and strategies per session. TMTC is a program structured to offer global cough rehabilitation. It is necessary to obtain scientific evidence on its effectiveness so that it can be used in clinical practice.
34076103	The peoples of the sea are culturally differentiated by their way of life, which is intertwined with sea fishing and all its social and symbolic production. In northeastern Brazil, these populations have been undergoing transformations in their living conditions. The Family Health Strategy (FHS) needs to strengthen links with different cultures in order to meet its basic principles. Our aim was to reflect on the challenges of the FHS in the context of the peoples of the sea. We carried out ethnographic research in the community of Redonda, Icapuí, Ceará, using dense descriptions constructed through the narratives of artisanal fishermen and their families. We analyzed them using the theoretical approach of traditional community studies. The results are presented in five themes: 1) in communities made up of relatives, the family has an extended dimension; 2) the temporalities of life in fishing govern the common acts of the land-sea dyad; 3) the shifts between being "native" and being "outsiders" create border zones that dialogue with the rituals of belonging; 4) the territorialization of the sea and the knowledge of experience; 5) ESF in the arenas of struggles for environmental justice. The production of health is reaffirmed here as the production of the life of the peoples of the sea.
34076104	This research seeks to analyze residents' knowledge of the territory, the Pecém Industrial and Port Complex (CIPP), the quality of life of the communities living around the developments, as well as the prevalence of hypertension and overweight. This is a household-based epidemiological survey involving four Family Health Strategy (FHS) areas in the municipality of São Gonçalo do Amarante and one in Caucaia, Ceará, Brazil. The study was carried out between 10/2017 and 03/2018, in which anthropometric and blood pressure measurements were taken and sociodemographic data and knowledge about community, CIPP and quality of life were collected. Of the 503 adults interviewed, 69.8% were female and the average age was 44. Parada was the area that reported the highest percentage of problems related to airborne particles (51.1%), the worst concept in relation to CIPP (40.1% bad), the highest percentage of worsening quality of life (29.1%) and the greatest desire to change (31.5%). Pecém had a higher percentage of community problems related to violence, illicit drug use and prostitution. The conclusion is that there is evidence of an impact on the health and quality of life of the local population without any direct benefits in terms of work/income.
34076105	This study evaluated the accessibility of care in the Family Health Strategy (ESF) in a municipal system, the headquarters of a health macro-region in the state of Bahia. It was an evaluative study at two levels of analysis: municipal management and the local organization of the ESF teams. Data production combined documentary analysis, non-participant observation and interviews with managers, professionals and users. An objective image was used with criteria and dimensions for evaluating accessibility in Primary Care. The Family Health Teams (EqSF) still do not fully fulfill the role of preferred contact in municipal health systems and accessibility to care reflects the interdependence of municipal and local factors. Rural and peripheral teams performed better in terms of organizational accessibility and central urban teams performed better in terms of geographical accessibility. The evaluation centred on geographical and organizational criteria, the combination of different sources of evidence and health system actors, as well as the use of levels of analysis considering municipal and local PHC management, are relevant contributions of this study, which can be extended to other municipal systems with similar characteristics.
34076106	The work of Community Health Agents (CHAs) was analyzed in the light of the Communities of Practice (CoP) theory. This was a cross-sectional qualitative study carried out in four municipalities in Ceará. Six focus groups and six interviews were carried out with 45 CHAs, respecting ethical aspects. The corpus of data was analyzed using the content analysis technique. The results showed that the participation of CHWs in the ESF is marked by their experience in the community, with the main focus being on monitoring priority groups. Their practices bring them face to face with various social and family complexities, generating reflections and constructing new meanings for themselves and the work process. The CHWs' CoP engage in and share the unique challenges and lessons learned from their work, characterized by their contact and intimate relationship with the families in the territory, which reveal needs that are little perceived by the other ESF professionals. As for the processes of reification, the meaning of being a CHA was shown to be one that listens and welcomes, as well as perceiving the needs of families that are invisible to the services. CHWs are better at playing the role of coordinator of the ESF in the territories, the more spaces there are for dialog between them, other team members and management.
34076107	Community and workplace violence against health professionals has caused feelings of vulnerability, emotional distress and psychological changes, which have been reflected in disturbances in sleep quality. We therefore sought to analyze the association between community and workplace violence and the quality of sleep of health professionals working in primary health care. The study was carried out with 286 health professionals working in primary health care in one of Brazil's largest cities. The primary outcome was sleep quality, as assessed by the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index. The majority of participants (69.2%/p=0.074) were classified as "poor sleepers", with nurses (73.3%/p=0.049) having the worst quality of sleep. In addition, most of the professionals had suffered some kind of violence at work (p<0.001), which had affected their professional activities (p=0.010), forced them to change their behavior (p<0.001), and to consider moving to another workplace (p=0.051). The results show that professionals have experienced episodes of fear, anxiety and stress related to violence in the workplace. This highlights the need for public policies aimed at occupational health.
34076108	The aim of the study was to investigate doctors' perceptions of the various forms of employment and their influence on the performance of the essential attributes of PHC, in order to analyze the forms of employment that best contribute to its implementation and strengthening. This was a quantitative, cross-sectional study using a semi-structured form with 268 FHS doctors in Fortaleza, Ceará. A unique sociodemographic profile was found for each group assessed, which can influence the work process and opinions on forms of hiring. The development of the essential attributes of PHC was evaluated positively, but there was a difference in this perception according to the employment relationship evaluated. The work done by doctors in the ESF is influenced by the way they are employed (p<0.001). The best performance was seen among those employed under the statutory system (4.4), followed by scholarship holders from the Mais Médicos Program/Programa de Valorização da Atenção Básica (3.7), the Consolidation of Labor Laws (3.5) and, lastly, those working under the Recibo de Pagamento Autônomomomo-RPA (2.4). It was analyzed that hiring via the Statutory Regime and RPA are, respectively, the best (85%) and worst (96.6%) form of hiring.
34076109	Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transvestite and transgender (LGBTT) populations have not had a place in the 'official history' of humanity, except as secondary actors who deviate, distort or even tarnish the memory of peoples, guided by cis-heteronormativity. These are the same people who often experience obstacles in the care offered by the Family Health Strategy (ESF), within a system that is universal, comprehensive and equitable. In this article, we seek to analyze experiences narrated by primary care professionals in health care for LGBTT populations in Teresina, Piauí, Brazil. This is a qualitative study carried out with 32 professionals working in a basic health unit. The analysis was based on three dimensions - relational, organizational and contextual - inspired by the theoretical discussion of Giovanella and Fleury. Primary care, which should be responsible for community health actions that prioritize health promotion and prevention, is the same unit that has offered denials, violence and negligence in the care of LGBTT people. We are therefore betting on listening as one of the keys to respecting sexual and gender diversity, so that these people are recognized as users of the ESF.
34076110	The study aimed to develop a prototype of the GISSA ChatBot Mother-Baby Application (GCBMB), a conversational agent aimed at promoting child health, as well as to evaluate the experience of use and satisfaction with this technological solution. This is a cross-sectional, mixed-methodology study in two stages: the first stage was to develop the dialog scenarios and the GCBMB prototype, and the second stage was to evaluate the experience of using the ChatBot by means of a structured questionnaire, and to analyze the path of use of the Application through its database. The sample consisted of 142 puerperal women, with an average age of 25.4 years, 38.1% of whom were primiparous. The women's level of agreement with the simplicity, good quality of the information, clarity of content, usefulness and satisfaction with the application was above 90%. Women between the ages of 26 and 30 had higher averages for number of accesses (5.21), number of scenarios accessed (9.26) and time of use (272 seconds) compared to younger and older women. The use of ChatBots on smartphones is encouraging for promoting children's health, but more investment is needed to improve technological solutions and research with robust methodologies to evaluate their effectiveness.
34076111	In the context of type 1 Diabetes Mellitus (DM1), one practice that is encouraged is self-care. The aim was therefore to develop and validate a mobile application (APP) for promoting self-care in adolescents with DM1. The method was divided into two stages: development and validation, ranging from literature review, benchmarking, prototype construction and validation by experts. The APP was built using the seven steps proposed by the American Association of Diabetes Educators. The screens were designed and the possible functions selected; after the design, the APP prototype was developed and named "DM Agendinha". The content validation process was mediated by the Suitability Assessment of Materials instrument, through which the percentage obtained was 85.3%, characterizing the APP as "Superior Material". For technical validation, the Smartphone Usability Questionnaire was used, which obtained an overall Content Validity Index of 0.96. It is therefore concluded that the use of this material by adolescents will favor the acquisition of new knowledge and adherence to healthy practices, given that it is an electronic technology that is easy to understand.
34076112	LARIISA's group of collaborators has been researching and developing technological solutions to support decision-making in healthcare systems since 2009. Among the solutions produced is GISSA®, a cloud system that is the result of the scientific and technological evolution of the LARIISA project. The aim of this article is to describe the evolution of GISSA®, a technological tool that supports the Family Health Strategy in northeastern Brazil, pointing out challenges, paths and potential. This is a descriptive and exploratory study, based on secondary sources from IBGE, INMET, SINAN, SIM and SINASC, with quantitative analysis based on machine learning models applied to the creation of digital health microservices. Operating in the northeast and southeast regions, GISSA® provides information that qualifies the decision-making process of health managers and, consequently, contributes to improving the management of the municipal health system.
34076113	Postgraduate studies in Brazil have grown in recent years, but there is a gap in knowledge as to whether the planned training objective of the course is being achieved. With this in mind, the objective was to evaluate the contribution of the Postgraduate Program in Family Health to the professional practice of its graduates. This is a cross-sectional study, carried out between October 2019 and July 2020, with 225 graduates. Data was collected using an online questionnaire containing different sociodemographic and training variables, as well as competencies developed during the master's degree and identification of the domains of Health Promotion Competencies. The majority of participants were female (78.2%), nurses (58.2), civil servants (64%) and SUS workers (93.3). It was noted that 222 (98.7%) graduates had the theme of their final paper come from a question related to practice. There were high average scores for all the competences assessed. The average scores for the Health Promotion Skills domains were high. The conclusion is that the postgraduate program has made a satisfactory contribution to the training of critical, active masters, with competences developed and being carried out in professional practice.
34076114	The aim is to discuss equity and access in mental health by analyzing the distribution of primary care teams (Community Health Agents; Family Health Teams; Expanded Family Health Center) and the coverage of the Psychosocial Care Network (RAPS) in three northeastern states (Ceará, Piauí and Rio Grande do Norte) in their respective health regions. This is a descriptive study, supported by exploratory quantitative analysis. To this end, we used the database of the Primary Care Department/DATASUS to collect secondary data on the historical series of Primary Care team qualifications. As for the RAPS points of care, we used the database provided by the Ministry of Health's National Mental Health Coordination. The research concluded that by 2018 there had been an important movement towards internalization and expansion of coverage in primary and psychosocial care in the country, with an impact on increasing equity in areas with lower economic and social development. However, it was found that PHC services are more internalized, while the other RAPS devices are more developed in the capitals and large municipalities.
34076115	The Unified Health System (SUS) has the Family Health Strategy (ESF) as its model for reorienting care and the work process. This article analyzes the conceptions of ESF professionals regarding mental health and the production of care in a Basic Health Unit in the Northeast of Brazil. This is a qualitative study, aligned with the critical interpretative approach, using interviews, free observation and document analysis, generating a network of meanings organized into two axes: a) "Mental Health" from the perspective of Family Health Strategy professionals and b) "Mental Health" care: praxis in the context of primary care. Despite the potential of the devices, the results of the study show conceptions of mental health that are congruent with a project of institutionalization and medicalization. With regard to the dimension of care, gaps were revealed regarding shared mental health experiences, through an incipient partnership between ESF and NASF professionals. The challenge remains to rebuild a vision aligned with the precepts of the Brazilian psychiatric reform and, in the materiality of teamwork, to create spaces that enable discussions, planning and agreements in the ESF's daily routine.
34076116	The aim of this article is to describe the indicators relating to planning and support in the work process reported by the Family Health Teams, from the 3rd cycle of the National Program for Improving Primary Care Access and Quality (PMAQ-AB) in the Northeast region of Brazil. Cross-sectional study using secondary data from the external evaluation of the 3rd cycle of PMAQ-AB. Sixteen indicators were used to assess the actions of the teams' work process. 14,489 family health teams that had joined the program were evaluated. Among the indicators evaluated, it was found that the teams held meetings and planned actions, self-assessment, monitoring and analysis of health indicators to reorganize the work process, highlighting the determining and conditioning factors. The indicators for institutional support and matrix support for resolving complex cases include health surveillance and the Expanded Family Health Center (NASF). It was identified that there have been improvements in the work process of the teams in the Northeast region, but the reality of fragmented and verticalized work still needs to change, favoring a panorama of teamwork and sharing, directly influencing the work process.
34076117	The aim of this article is to compare the assessment of users who took part in the PMAQ-AB regarding child health between the states of the Northeast macro-region of Brazil. This is a cross-sectional study using secondary data, based on interviews with 5,116 users from 4,190 Family Health Teams working in the nine states of the northeast macro-region. Fourteen questions about the monitoring of children aged 0 to 2 were evaluated. Proportions and 95% confidence intervals were calculated according to Federative Unit of the Northeast region of Brazil. The indicators with the highest proportions were heel prick test performed within seven days of life (84.4%), child always consulted by the same professionals (79.1%), monitoring of growth and development expected for age (84.9%), dietary guidance (86.3%), vaccination up to date (95.3%). The indicators with the lowest proportions were guidance on the best sleeping position for the child (45.7%) and whether the child had received a health booklet (46.9%). In all indicators, there were significant differences between the states analyzed. There are differences in the quality of care offered to children according to the evaluation of the users participating in the PMAQ-AB between states in the Northeast.
34076118	The aim of this article is to evaluate the structure and work process of Family Health Strategy health teams in relation to the nutritional care of children. This is an evaluation study of 136 health teams in 45 municipalities in the state of Paraíba. Data on structure (availability of anthropometric equipment, supplements and technical documents) and process (management, intersectorality and activities of the Amamenta e Alimenta Brasil Strategy) were summarized in scores and classified as incipient, intermediate or advanced. Analyses were carried out according to the contextual characteristics of the municipality (population size and human development) and the health team (whether it was part of the More Doctors Program or conventional and whether it had a nutritionist or not). Nutritional care was classified at the intermediate level, with the availability of technical documents, the use of SISVAN or e-SUS and the implementation of the Amamenta e Alimenta Brasil Strategy being the most deficient items. Larger municipalities and expanded health teams with nutritionists had better conditions in terms of structure and process, respectively. The fragmented implementation of nutritional care requires improvements in structure and process in order to be qualified.
34076119	The elderly are vulnerable to the risks of using medicines, especially those considered potentially inappropriate (PIM) where the risks outweigh the benefits. The study sought to evaluate PIMs prescribed in Primary Health Care (PHC) and their associated factors. A cross-sectional, analytical study was carried out from March to December 2019, in PHC in Campina Grande, Paraíba, through interviews with 458 elderly people. The independent variables included socioeconomic characteristics, health status and medication use, and the outcome was medication classified as PIM by the Brazilian Consensus of Potentially Inappropriate Medications. At least one PIM was prescribed for 44.8% of the elderly and most of them acted on the Central Nervous System (54.4%). In the adjusted model, depression (PR=2.01; 95%CI 1.59-2.55), using drugs other than those prescribed (PR=1.36; 95%CI 1.08-1.72) and polypharmacy (PR=1.80; 95%CI 1.40-2.33) remained associated factors and self-reported hypertension became a protective factor (PR=0.65; 95%CI 0.49-0.87). There is a need for actions to improve the use of medicines by the elderly, in order to guarantee access combined with safety.
34076120	The research aims to identify the structuring elements that guide the formation of social representations of diabetic foot among people with diabetes mellitus. This is a qualitative study, based on the Theory of Social Representations, following the complementary structural approach, carried out in a capital city in the Northeast of Brazil, from February to May 2019, with the participation of 100 people with diabetic foot. Data was collected using the free word association test and a script to characterize the sociodemographic and clinical profile. The analysis was carried out using openEVOC software. The constituent elements of the social representation of diabetic foot refer to the evocations "cure" and "very bad", and reveal that living with diabetic foot is challenging, but that there is hope of a cure which is the driving force behind the daily search for care. The element of prevention appeared in the representational field, which denotes a more critical view that can transform the core elements identified. The representational structure is anchored in subjective, evaluative and attitudinal content. It is concluded that this knowledge can contribute to the design of interventions that help with diabetic foot care and screening practices in Primary Health Care services.
34076121	This study aimed to describe the prevalence of leprosy and verify the factors associated with multibacillary clinical forms in a Family Health Strategy setting, a priority for the control and surveillance of the disease in northeastern Brazil. This is a cross-sectional study using data from the Notifiable Diseases Information System on leprosy cases reported in Imperatriz, Maranhão, between 2008 and 2017. Prevalence rates were determined for each year and for the period. Poisson regression models were used to associate the variables and the multibacillary clinical forms, with a significance level of 5%. Of the 2,476 leprosy cases analyzed, the majority were multibacillary clinical forms. Prevalence varied between 15.6 and 7.8/10,000 inhabitants, with high and very high levels of endemicity. The following variables were significantly associated (p≤0.05) with multibacillary clinical forms: male gender, age groups between 30 and 59 years and ≥60 years, schooling <8 years, grade 2 physical disability, type 1 and 2 reactional episodes and urban area of residence. These findings can serve as a basis for designing and implementing leprosy control and surveillance measures, targeting the most vulnerable groups and making them more effective.
34076122	In this interview, Antônio Carlile Holanda Lavor, a sanitary doctor with a career spanning 57 years and extensive experience in the management of the Unified Health System (SUS), especially in primary health care, talks about his management of the Oswaldo Cruz Foundation unit in Ceará (Fiocruz-CE) from 2008 to the present day. Known internationally for having institutionalized the Health Agents Program in Ceará in 1987, he discusses the process of setting up Fiocruz-CE and the role of research in guiding the work of the Family Health Strategy during the Covid-19 pandemic.
34076123	The aim is to verify the association between sexual maturation and physical activity in adolescence. This is a systematic review study based on articles published between 2008 and 2018 in the Medline-PubMed, SciELO, Web of Science, Scopus, Lilacs and Adolec BVS databases. The descriptors and keywords adolescent, sexual maturation, survey, questionnaire and physical activity were used in Portuguese and their equivalence in English and 806 articles were identified. After applying the selection criteria, 12 articles were included. A higher level of physical activity was observed in adolescents in the early stages of sexual maturation. The evolution of sexual maturational development seems to be correlated with a reduction in physical activity levels. The findings do not show a consensus on the association between sexual maturation and the level of physical activity in terms of the direct or inverse predisposition of sexual maturation in relation to the level of physical activity among adolescents. More research is needed to understand this relationship and enable professionals involved in adolescent health to act effectively to combat physical inactivity.
34076125	The text presents and discusses the main aspects related to the current dynamics of the vaccine industry in the world and in Brazil, with a focus on the demand created by the COVID-19 pandemic. At the global level, it briefly describes the place currently occupied by Brazil within the BRICS and describes and analyzes the industrial policy options - identities and differences - of Brazil, China and India in the field of vaccines. It then analyzes the shift in the vaccine industry from a situation of exclusive production of immunizers to majority control by the large pharmaceutical industry. It goes on to look at recent fundamental aspects of the vaccine industry in Brazil, with an emphasis on Biomanguinhos/Fiocruz and the Butantan Institute. Finally, it discusses the successes and limitations of the technology transfer mechanism used by the two institutions, as well as the relevance of their historical commitment to public health policies.
34076126	This essay reflects on sexual practices and prevention in the context of the AIDS and COVID-19 pandemics. It analyzes data collected between July and October 2020, through participant observation, as part of an ethnographic research on vulnerability and HIV prevention among men who have sex with men in the Metropolitan Region of Recife. The results point to the relevance of body appearance and the affective bond between partners in engendering emotions that mediate dealing with the risk of infection in both pandemics. It points to the need to incorporate these communicational dimensions into information materials in order to make them more effective.
34076127	The objective was to verify adherence to preventive measures in elderly people with a greater predisposition to severe forms of COVID-19 and its association and interaction with social support. This is a cross-sectional study carried out on a sample of 3,477 participants in the telephone survey of the Brazilian Longitudinal Study of Aging (ELSI-COVID-19 initiative), who reported having left home in the week prior to the survey. Adherence was measured by the frequency of leaving the house, the need to leave the house, the use of a mask and hand hygiene. The analyses were based on the Poisson model with robust variance. Age ≥ 65 years, hypertension, diabetes and obesity were considered predisposing factors for severe forms of COVID-19. Social support included household arrangement and social connection in the pandemic. Approximately 46% had better adherence, which was positively associated with the number of predisposing factors for severe forms. Social support was not associated with adherence and did not change this association after adjustments. The conclusion is that adherence to prevention measures, which should be extended to everyone, is concentrated among older people with a greater predisposition to severe forms of COVID-19, regardless of social support.
34076129	The aim of this article is to analyze the use of spatial artificial intelligence in the context of COVID-19 immunization for the appropriate selection of the necessary resources. This is a cross-sectional ecological study based on a spatial-temporal approach using secondary data from Basic Health Units in Brazil. Four analytical steps were adopted to assign a population volume per basic unit, applying artificial intelligence algorithms to satellite images. In parallel, the conditions of mobile internet access and the mapping of space-time trends in serious cases of COVID-19 were used to characterize each municipality in the country. Around 18% of Brazil's elderly population is more than 4 kilometers away from a vaccination room. In total, 4,790 municipalities showed a trend towards acute cases of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome. The North and Northeast regions had the highest number of Basic Health Units more than 5 kilometers away from cell phone antennas. The national vaccination plan requires the use of innovative strategies to overcome the country's challenges. The use of methodologies based on spatial artificial intelligence can help improve the planning of COVID-19 response actions.
34076131	This article addresses the occurrence of health problems resulting from firearm-related injuries (FAF) that affected active-duty military police officers in the Metropolitan Region of Rio de Janeiro (RJ). This is a documentary study, which analyzed the medical records of military police officers treated at the Central Military Police Hospital (HCPM) as a result of firearm-related injuries, from June 2015 to December 2017, according to variables related to professional profile, the characteristics of the event and the injury, the spatial distribution of the firearm-related injuries and the health units involved in the care. In the period investigated, 475 military police officers suffered firearm injuries: 98.3% were male, 77.3% were on duty, 97.9% were privates. As for the anatomical location of the injuries, the most affected regions were: lower limbs (41.1%) and upper limbs (33.1%), head-neck-face region (23.5%) and chest-abdomen (17.3%). The areas in the Metropolitan Region of Rio de Janeiro where the highest occurrences of firearm-related morbidity were found were planning areas 3 and 1 and the Baixada Fluminense. There was a correlation between police firearm morbidity rates in the municipalities of the metropolitan region and demographic density (p = 0.024).
34076133	To analyze the network of correlations between the dimensions of the Effort-Reward Imbalance Model (ERD), resilience and quality of life in military police officers. Cross-sectional study carried out with 258 police officers from the Special Operations Battalion (BOE) of the Military Police in a city in Rio Grande do Sul. The DER Model, resilience and World Health Quality of Life (WHOQOL-bref) scales assessed psychosocial stress, resilience and quality of life. Descriptive and analytical statistics were carried out, with network analysis. The dimensions of the RSD Model and resilience correlated with all the WHOQOL domains (p<0.001). The network model indicated a negative association between effort, overcommitment and the physical and environmental domains. The environmental domain was positively associated with reward, and resilience was positively associated with the general, physical and psychological domains. It was concluded that psychosocial stress interferes with the quality of life of military police officers and that resilience can act as a protective factor.
34076134	The aim of this article is to assess the association between body image and sociodemographic variables and health behaviors, by male and female gender. We analyzed data from 6,289 women and 5,188 men, aged between 35 and 59, participating in the baseline of the Longitudinal Study of Adult Health (ELSA-Brazil) using multinomial regression. Among women, the likelihood of dissatisfaction with feeling thin was higher among those with less schooling and those who ate fruit weekly. Moderate physical activity reduced the chance of this type of dissatisfaction by 50%. Higher degrees of dissatisfaction with being overweight were observed among married women, those who practiced light physical activity and ex-smokers. Men with an average level of schooling and excessive alcohol consumption had around 50% higher chances of dissatisfaction due to low weight, while practicing light or moderate physical activity increased this chance by 75% and 94%, respectively. Among men, light and moderate physical activity also increased the chance of dissatisfaction with being overweight. These findings help to reinforce the fact that unhealthy habits and behaviors can influence body image dissatisfaction in different ways according to gender.
34076135	The aim of this article is to investigate the relationship between physical intimate partner violence (IPV) and the supply of breast milk (BML), breast milk substitutes (BMS) and the use of bottles among children aged between 12 and 15 months. This was a cross-sectional study of mothers in health units in the municipality of Rio de Janeiro, carried out between June 2005 and December 2009. VFPI was identified using the Brazilian version of the Conflict Tactics Scales 1- Form R and feeding practices were identified using a 24-hour recall. Associations were verified by logistic regression using odds ratio (OR) estimates and 95% confidence intervals. Breast milk was offered to 58.5% of the children and breast milk substitutes to 88.5%, and 70.5% of the children used a bottle. Physical violence was observed in 26.7% of couples. In households where couples physically abuse each other, there is a greater chance of not offering breast milk, a greater chance of offering breast milk substitutes and using a bottle compared to households where there is no physical violence. The results call attention to the need to investigate intra-family relationships in cases where inadequate breastfeeding practices are identified, and to train health professionals to support families in situations of conflict.
34076136	The aim of this study was to describe the food environment of a medium-sized town in southern Brazil and to relate the availability of different types of food businesses to the socio-economic and demographic characteristics of the surrounding area. This is an ecological study of 45 400m buffers in São Leopoldo, Rio Grande do Sul. The buffer was calculated from the centroid of the homes of the women participating in a larger research project. All the streets were walked to identify the food stores, whose geographical coordinates were recorded, and the availability, price and quality of 108 items were assessed using the NEMS (Nutrition Environment Measures Survey in Stores) questionnaire. The stores were classified as supermarkets, grocery stores, fruit stores and convenience stores. Supermarkets and grocery stores were more prevalent in the lower-income buffers and grocery stores were more prevalent in those with higher population tertiles. There was a direct relationship between NEMS scores and income tercile for supermarkets, grocery stores and fruit shops, and an indirect relationship for the same shops and population tercile. The availability of healthy foods was higher in areas with higher incomes and fewer inhabitants, which indicates the need for better distribution of shops and food varieties.
34076137	The aims of the study were to assess the prevalence of self-reported visual impairment among 18 to 39-year-old students at the Federal University of Pelotas and to validate a question about visual impairment in a subsample of participants, with data collected between November 2017 and July 2018. A cross-sectional study was carried out with the question "Do you have any difficulty seeing near and/or far?". As the gold standard for the validation study, visual acuity (VA) was measured using the Snellen chart. VA is considered altered when it is less than 20/40 in any eye. The prevalence of self-reported visual impairment was 37.3% (95%CI: 35.1-39.6) and that of VA below 20/40 in any eye was 6.9% (95%CI: 5.3-8.9). The question had a sensitivity of 71.4% (95%CI: 57.8-82.7), specificity of 66.9% (95%CI: 63.4-70.2), positive predictive value of 13.8% (95%CI: 10.0-18.3) and negative predictive value of 96.9% (95%CI: 95.1-98.2). The results indicated a high prevalence of self-reported visual impairment among university students and a question with reasonable sensitivity and specificity and a high negative predictive value, which could be used as a screening for consultation with an ophthalmologist and in epidemiological studies with young adult university students.
34076154	To identify the predictive capacity for mortality of the Revised Trauma Score, Rapid Emergency Medicine Score, modified Rapid Emergency Medicine Score and Simplified Acute Physiology Score III in blunt trauma victims admitted to an intensive care unit and to compare their performance. Retrospective cohort of blunt trauma patients in an intensive care unit based on medical records. Receiver Operating Characteristic and 95% confidence interval of the area under the curve were analyzed to compare the results. Of the 165 patients analyzed, 66.7% underwent surgical treatment. Mortality in the intensive care unit and in hospital was 17.6% and 20.6%, respectively. For intensive care mortality, the areas under the curve varied between 0.672 and 0.738; however, better results were observed in surgical patients (0.747 to 0.811). Similar results were observed for hospital mortality. In all the analyses, the areas under the curve of the indices did not differ significantly. There was moderate accuracy of the severity indices, with improved performance when applied to surgical patients. The four indices showed similar prediction for the outcomes analyzed.
34076179	To compare the effect of non-nutritive sucking, 25% oral glucose and 25% oral glucose combined with non-nutritive sucking on pain relief in premature newborns undergoing heel pricks for blood glucose monitoring. Randomized crossover clinical trial with 34 premature infants who randomly received the following interventions: non-nutritive sucking, 25% oral glucose and the two interventions combined for three consecutive days during heel pricks for blood glucose monitoring. The Premature Infant Pain Profile was evaluated for 30 seconds before the intervention, called the baseline period, and for 5 minutes after the puncture. The combination of interventions returned the premature infants to the baseline period, at 1 minute and 30 seconds after the heel prick, resulting in a percentage reduction of 2.2% on the scale. A comparison of the effect of isolated and combined interventions showed that, when offered in combination, preterm infants were able to return to baseline parameters more quickly. Brazilian Registry of Clinical Trials: RBR-3gm6w5.
34076180	To analyze fake news about immunobiologicals using vaccine hesitancy as a reference in the World Health Organization's 3Cs model (trust, complacency and convenience). This is an exploratory qualitative study that used content analysis to analyze fake news on three national news-checking websites. Twenty pieces of fake news related to immunobiologicals were analyzed, 55% published in 2018 and 63% related to the yellow fever vaccine. Based on the analysis of the results, two empirical categories were considered: Immunobiologicals have a potential risk of death/consequela and Immunobiologicals are ineffective. Fake news has the potential to produce vaccine hesitancy based on the 3Cs model. It is therefore necessary to rethink communicative practices in health that do not underestimate the asymmetries and inequities that characterize Brazil's unequal society. Considering that nurses are the largest workforce in vaccine rooms, there is a need to engage these professionals as an active vehicle of truthful information on immunobiologicals for the population.
34076209	To investigate factors associated with the notification of noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL) in the Brazilian Notifiable Diseases Information System. An ecological study was carried out to estimate the proportion of municipalities reporting NIHL. Logistic regression models were used to identify associated factors. Between 2013 and 2015, 277 (5.0%) municipalities notified Pair. Notification was more common among municipalities with Cerest coverage (OR=1.62 - 95%CI 1.02;2.59) or which had a Cerest unit in their territory (OR=4.37 - 95%CI 2.75;6.93), at a shorter distance from the state capital (OR=1.43 - 95%CI 1.06;1.92) and with a high human development index (OR=2.35 - 95%CI 1.16;4.75). Among the municipalities located in an area covered by Cerest, notification was more common when the team included a speech therapist (OR=1.96 - 95%CI 1.47;2.63) and there was a low turnover of professionals (OR=1.88 - 95%CI 1.40;2.52). Contextual factors influence the notification of Pair, notably the existence and qualification of Cerest.
34076227	To analyze the prevalence and factors associated with polypharmacy in elderly residents of Rio Branco, Acre, Brazil, in 2014. This was a cross-sectional, population-based study of elderly people using complex sampling. Polypharmacy was defined as the concomitant use of five or more drugs. The prevalence of polypharmacy was 14.9% (95%CI 11.8;18.6), positively associated with female gender (OR=2.29 - 95%CI 1.41;3.74), white race/skin color (OR=1.61 - 95%CI 1.10;2.38), dependence (OR=1.65 - 95%CI 1.05;2.60), change in eating habits/diet use (OR=1.66 - 95%CI 1.16;2.36), hospitalization in the last 12 months (OR=1.61 - 95%CI 1.02;2.53) and presence of the following self-reported morbidities: systemic arterial hypertension (OR=2.40 - 95%CI 1.33;4.34), diabetes mellitus (OR=2.17 - 95%CI 1.23;3.84), osteoporosis (OR=2.92 - 95%CI 1.84;4.64) and heart problems (OR=2.94 - 95%CI 1.90;4.56). Polypharmacy in the elderly found in this study was associated with demographic and health conditions.
34076228	To analyze aspects related to positivity for schistosomiasis in a low-prevalence area in Brazil. This was a cross-sectional study carried out in the first half of 2020, in which the proportion of positivity was analyzed according to the number of Kato-Katz slides, the diagnostic performance of the test and the estimation of positivity based on data from the Information System of the Schistosomiasis Surveillance and Control Program (SISPCE). 2,088 slides from 348 individuals were analyzed, and the proportion of positivity was 11.8%, 26.7% and 31.0% for 1, 4 and 6 slides analyzed, respectively. There was excellent agreement (Kappa index = 0.91) when comparing the readings of 4 and 6 slides. Underreporting of 2.1 times was estimated in the SISPCE data. Increasing the number of slides increased Kato-Katz positivity, which could help to maximize control of the disease as a Public Health problem.
34076229	To analyze the prevalence and factors associated with intimate partner violence during pregnancy. Cross-sectional study, with data obtained from interviews with pregnant women aged 10 to 49, in the third trimester of pregnancy, living in Caxias, Maranhão, Brazil (2019-2020). The World Health Organization Violence Against Women Study instrument was used to identify the form of violence. A hierarchical analysis was carried out using multiple logistic regression. 233 pregnant women were interviewed. Pregnancy violence had a prevalence of 33.0%, with a predominance of psychological violence (18.9%). In the final hierarchical model, the woman's age <20 years (ORaj=2.09 - 95%CI 1.17;3.54) and her partner's use of illicit drugs (ORaj=8.78 - 95%CI 2.13;28.92) remained associated with the outcome of violence. Pregnancy violence was highly prevalent, with the woman's young age and the use of illicit substances by her partner being factors associated with its occurrence.
34077986	To study a sample of patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA), investigating their gynecological and obstetric history and comparing it with controls, in order to find out their influences on the number of pregnancies, menarche, menopause and reproductive years at the onset of RA. METHODS: This is a cross-sectional study of 122 RA patients and 126 controls. Patients and controls were asked about age at menarche, age at menopause, number of pregnancies and miscarriages. Reproductive years were calculated as the difference between age at menopause and age at menarche. Mann-Whitney, unpaired t-test, chi-square test and Spearman's test were used for comparison. The significance level adopted was 5%. In patients with RA and postmenopausal onset of the disease, the period of reproductive years (age at menopause - age at menarche) showed a positive correlation with the age of onset of the disease (rho = 0.46; 95% confidence interval [95%CI] = 0.20-0.55 with <i>p</i> = 0.0008). The number of pregnancies was higher in patients with onset of the disease in the postmenopausal period when compared to premenopausal patients (median of 3 with interquartile range [IQR] = 2-4 versus median of 2 with IQR = 1-3; <i>p</i> = 0.009). A greater number of pregnancies were observed in RA patients than in the control group (<i>p</i> = 0.0002). CONCLUSION: This study shows that, in our population, a decrease in reproductive years and a high number of pregnancies are related to the onset of RA.
34077987	Most prenatal screening programs for toxoplasmosis use immunoassays on serum samples from pregnant women. Few studies have evaluated the accuracy of screening tests on dried blood samples, which are easy to collect, store and transport. This study aimed to determine the performance and evaluate the agreement between an immunoassay in dried blood and a reference test in serum from pregnant women in a population-based prenatal screening program for toxoplasmosis in Brazil. METHODS: A cross-sectional study was carried out to compare the immunoassays Imunoscreen Toxoplasmosis IgM and Imunoscreen Toxoplasmosis IgG (Mbiolog Diagnósticos, Ltda., Contagem, Minas Gerais, Brazil) in dried blood with the reference standard enzyme-linked fluorescent assay (ELFA, BioMérieux S.A., Lion, France) in the serum of pregnant women from the Minas Gerais Congenital Toxoplasmosis Control Program. The dried blood test was able to discriminate between positive and negative results in pregnant women when compared to the reference test, with an accuracy of 98.2% for immunoglobulin G (IgG) and 95.8% for immunoglobulin M (IgM). CONCLUSION: Dried blood performs well and is easy to collect, store and transport, making it a promising method for prenatal toxoplasmosis screening programs in countries with continental dimensions, limited resources and a high prevalence of toxoplasmosis, as is the case in Brazil.
34077988	To clarify the possible antitumor role of T<sub>DC</sub> γδ and T<sub>DC</sub> αβ cells in an experimental breast cancer model. METHODS: Thirty Balb/c mouse spleens analyzed by flow cytometry, separated into the control group (<i>n</i> = 15) and the 4T1-induced tumor group (<i>n</i> = 15). Presence of 26.53% of T<sub>DC</sub> γδ in control group mice (<i>p</i> < 0.0001), proportion of T<sub>DC</sub> αβ lower in splenic cells than T<sub>DC</sub> γδ; however, these two cell types are reduced under tumor conditions (<i>p</i> < 0.0001), and the proportion of cytokines IFN-γ, TNF-α, IL-12 and IL-17 produced by T<sub>DC</sub> γδ cells was higher than those produced by T<sub>DC</sub> αβ cells, but were decreased under conditions of tumor-related immune system response (<i>p</i> < 0.0001). CONCLUSION: Healthy mice induced with 4T1 breast tumor presented T<sub>DC</sub> with TCR γδ repertoire. These cells express cytotoxic T-lymphocyte molecules, producing anti-tumor proinflammatory cytokines.
34077989	To evaluate serum adiponectin levels in adolescent pregnant women between 30 and 36 weeks of gestation. METHODS: Prospective, cross-sectional study including 67 normal, eutrophic pregnant women between 30 and 36 weeks (body mass index [BMI]: 18.5-25 kg/m<sup>2</sup>), 36 adolescents (< 20 years) and 31 adults (≥ 20 years). Serum adiponectin levels were assessed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The t-Student or Mann-Whitney tests were used to compare the groups. Adolescent pregnant women had significantly higher serum adiponectin concentrations than adult pregnant women (<i>p</i> = 0.04). There were no differences in adiponectin levels when comparing early (< 16 years) to late (≥ 16 years) adolescent pregnancies. Adiponectin values were subdivided into 3 groups: < 3,000 ng/mL, between 3,000 and 5,000 ng/mL and > 5,000 ng/mL. Newborn weight was significantly higher in women with > 5,000 ng/mL compared to those with < 3,000 ng/mL in the adolescent group. There was no association between adiponectin levels and pre-gestational BMI, gestational weight gain and gestational age, but there was a positive relationship with newborn weight (<i>p</i> = 0.0239). CONCLUSION: Serum adiponectin values in adolescent pregnant women between 30 and 36 weeks of gestation were higher than those of adult pregnant women; however, there were no differences between early and late adolescent pregnant women.
34077990	In a healthy athlete, the caloric intake is sufficient for the athlete's energy needs and for the body's physiological functions, allowing for a balance between energy availability (ED), bone metabolism and menstrual function. On the other hand, an imbalance due to low energy availability (BDE) as a result of a restrictive diet, eating disorders or long periods of energy expenditure leads to multisystemic dysregulation, prioritizing essential body functions. This phenomenon, first described as the female athlete triad and now known as relative energy deficit in sport (RED-S), is based on EDB, menstrual dysfunction and changes in bone mineral density (BMD) and is present in a considerable percentage of top athletes, with harmful consequences for their future in the short, medium and long term. This review was carried out on the basis of a critical analysis of the most recent publications available and aims to provide a global perception of the topic of S-RED. The aim is to promote the acquisition of more consolidated knowledge on an underappreciated subject, enabling the acquisition of preventive strategies, early diagnosis and/or appropriate treatment.
34077991	The pathophysiology of the placenta in SARS-CoV-2 infection can help researchers understand more about the infection and its impact on maternal/neonatal outcomes. This brief review provides an overview of some aspects of placental pathology in SARS-CoV-2 infection. A total of 11 articles were included. Current literature suggests that there are no specific histopathological features in placentas related to SARS-CoV-2 infection, but placentas from infected women are more likely to show findings of maternal and/or fetal malperfusion. The most common findings in placentas from infected women were fibrin deposition and intense recruitment of inflammatory infiltrates. Transplacental transmission of this virus is unlikely, due to the low expression of the receptor for SARS-CoV-2 in placental cell types. Further studies are needed to improve our knowledge of the interaction between the virus and the mother-fetus dyad and the impact on maternal and neonatal/fetal outcomes.
