24192084 In the present article we evaluate and comment the systematic review from Cochrane Collaboration 'Effect of longer-term modest salt reduction on blood pressure. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013 Apr 30;4:CD004937'. What is the impact of long-term (= 4 weeks) modest salt (sodium chloride) reduction on arterial blood pressure? This systematic review concluded that a moderate reduction in salt intake (mean reduction -4.4 g per day) resulted in statistically significant decreases in blood pressure (BP) that may be helpful in normotensive (-2.42 mmHg systolic BP; -1.00 mmHg diastolic BP) and hypertensive patients (-5.39 mmHg systolic BP; -2.82 mmHg diastolic BP). There were slight increases in physiological plasma renin activity, aldosterone and norepinephrine, without significant changes in lipid profile.
24192088 It is very important to review the meaning of the Odds Ratio as a measure of effect and association, as well as, the bias of the Odds Ratio when it is assumed as a risk ratio or a prevalence ratio in the case of frequent disease or frequent health outcome. We simulated in a cohort of 200 individuals with 100 exposed and 100 non-exposed to a risk factor, a first setting of rare disease and a second setting of a more frequent disease. In both settings the risk ratios were similar. We computed the Odds Ratio and Relative Risks by the classical approach (standard method) and respectively by logistic regression and Poisson regression. After these, we introduced in the cohort a confounding variable and then we computed the Odds Ratio and Relative Risk by Mantel-Hanszel stratified analysis (standard method) and respectively by multiple logistic regression and multiple Poisson regression. We used the 95% confidence interval in parameter estimation and SPSS V20 was used in statistical analysis. In the case of rare disease the Odds Ratio was very close to the Relative Risk. For more frequent disease the Odds Ratio overestimated the Relative Risk. In this situation and with a confounding variable, the relative Risk adjusted by Poisson regression was more valid then the Odds Ratio to represent a risk ratio. The confidence intervals of the Relative Risk adjusted by Poisson regression were always greater than Mantel-Hanszel confidence intervals. The Odds Ratio and multiple logistic regression were valid analytic procedures in several epidemiological designs such as case-control studies and exploratory prospective studies as well as exploratory cross-sectional studies. The Odds Ratio should not be interpreted as a risk ratio or a prevalence ratio in the case of a health outcome that it is not rare. The multiple Poisson regression should be considered as an alternative procedure to logistic regression, especially if we want to estimate the effect of a specific exposure to a risk factor.
24192089 In total knee arthroplasty and total hip arthroplasty occurs a considerable loss of blood, which often requires homologous transfusions of red blood cells. However, homologous transfusions have risks, besides being expensive and a limited resource. Thus, in order to reduce the need for homologous transfusions alternatives strategies have been developed, like post-operative recovery of blood. Evaluation of post-operative recovery of blood in postoperatively red blood cells consumption and in hospital stay, by a retrospective analysis of patients undergoing total knee arthroplasty or total hip arthroplasty. Patients (n = 976) were divided in 2 groups: CELL TRANS - after implementation of postoperative recovery of blood and CONT - before implementation of the strategy. The red blood cells requests to Serviço de Imunohemoterapia gave the number of RBC units administered and the length of hospital stay was obtained through the Sistema de Apoio ao Médico. Statistical analysis was performed using the R language, considering significant differences between groups when p values < 0,05. After the introduction of this strategy, 29% of patients undergoing total knee arthroplasty and 38% of patients undergoing total hip arthroplasty received red blood cells in the postoperative period, a number considerably lower to that observed before the implementation of post-operative recovery of blood, 68% and 59% respectively. Concomitantly, there was a statistically significant reduction in the length of stay of 9.0 to 8.3 days in the case of total knee arthroplasty patients and from 9.1 to 8.8 days in the case of patients undergoing total hip arthroplasty. Post-operative recovery of blood in patients undergoing total knee arthroplasty or total hip arthroplasty significantly reduces the need for red blood cells transfusion and the length of hospital stay.
24192090 Renal transplantation is the treatment of choice for children with end stage renal disease with positive impact on survival and quality of life. However, some complications affect morbidity and mortality. This study examines the renal transplantation complications profile in pediatric patients (<18 y). Retrospective analysis of clinical files from renal transplantation patients followed in Pediatric Nephrology Unit from September 1995 to August 2010. Collection of data regarding: demography, end stage renal disease etiology, previous renal replacement therapy, graft loss and death, complications: surgical, infectious and non-infectious (acute and chronic rejection, primary disease recurrence, metabolic and cardiovascular risk factors). Descriptive statistical analysis was performed. 78 children (male: 48.7%), mean age at renal transplantation: 11.7 4.1 years. Previous peritoneal dialysis in 49 (62.6%). Five patients (6.4%) with preemptive renal transplantation. Median follow up: 37.5 months (1-169). Main end stage renal disease etiologies were urologic conditions in 41% and glomerular disease in 28.2%. Infectious complications occurred in 74%: viral: 56.4% (cytomegalovirus in 39.7%); bacterial in 53.8% (mainly urinary tract infections). Non-infectious complications were: 1) cardiovascular risk factors: hypertension in 85.9%, hyperlipidemia in 16.7% and new onset diabetes post transplantation in 7.7%; 2) acute graft dysfunction in 32.1%; graft chronic nephropathy 17.9%; 3) surgical complications 16.7%. In the first month after renal transplantation, surgical complications (11.5%) and bacterial infections were the most prevalent complications. Between the 1st and the 6th month there were more bacterial (34.6% patients) and viral (17.9% patients) infections. From 6th month on, cardiovascular risk factors (89.7% patients) became the more prevalent. There was one death. The most frequent infections were viral, mainly CMV. Acute graft dysfunction was frequent after the 6th month, probably associated with poor compliance. New morbidities, namely cardiovascular risk factors, are emerging with the evolution of new diagnostic, prophylactic and therapeutic strategies for renal transplantation.
24192091 Smoking prevalence in Portugal is estimated to be 19.7% (2005). Smoking is prevalent in anxiety disorders. Studies report that 60% of smokers have a history of depression. The Fagerström scale can be used to assess smoke dependence. The Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale allows an estimate of anxiety and depression. Our goal was to find whether there is a relationship between smoking and anxiety / depression in eight clinics within primary care practice. We designed an observational, descriptive, cross-sectional, analytical study. Anonymous survey. We considered as inclusion criteria the over 18 years of age and literate clinic users and as exclusion criteria the under 18 years old users or incomplete surveys. We defined as variables: Fagerström, Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale, age, marital status, gender, profession, schooling. We obtained a total of 608 valid surveys of which there were 64% women and 21% smokers. We found no differences in the prevalence of anxiety or depression when comparing non-smokers, ex-smokers and smokers. We found that the degree of nicotine addiction varies directly with anxiety and depression, however, the only statistically significant relationship observed was in women, even after correcting the effect of age. There is a relationship between nicotine dependence and the severity of symptoms of anxiety and depression, most relevant in women. selection bias. This study supplies information regarding psychological factors associated with tobacco consumption, allowing for its inclusion in treatment options for nicotine dependence.
24192092 Herpes zoster and post-herpetic neuralgia increasing incidence is related to ageing. These conditions can be very debilitating and have an important impact in patients' quality of life. In an ageing population like the Portuguese, is expected that the burden of herpes zoster and post-herpetic neuralgia rises, nevertheless, a specific surveillance system for zoster does not exist in the country, and data regarding the incidence of herpes zoster and the burden of the disease in Portugal in the last decades was not found. In Portugal, the vaccine is still not available. Scaling the burden of disease is important to support public health policies regarding zoster vaccination. We carried out a retrospective analysis from encoded information from the Portuguese Ministery of Health database for hospital admissions which included all individuals with a primary diagnosis of Herpes Zoster (IDC-9-CM 053), who were discharged between 2000 and 2010. In Portugal, between 2000 and 2010, 1 706 hospital admissions with primary diagnosis of herpes zoster occurred. The majority of the patients were elderly. Eleven percent of the patients had potentially severe immunocompromise. The predominant disease was uncomplicated herpes zoster, followed by nervous system and ophthalmic herpes zoster. Mean hospital stay length was 9.3 days, increasing with age. There was a 1% case fatality rate. Considering the 2000-2009 period and the adult population only, the average annual incidence rate of hospitalization with primary diagnosis of herpes zoster in Portugal was 1.9/100 000 inhabitants, increasing with age. This study confirms that, in Portugal, severe herpes zoster is related to ageing and associated with significant morbidity, mortality and health resources allocation.
24192093 There is a paucity of pan-European research on the state of medication-assisted treatment (MAT) from the perspective of the physicians who provide it, the patients who receive it and the opioid users who remain outside of the treatment system. Project ACCESS, a Europe-wide survey involving 11 countries, explored physicians', patients' and users' attitudes and beliefs regarding the quality of and access to medication-assisted treatment. This report presents key findings from Portugal. Physicians who treat opioid-dependent patients with medication-assisted treatment were interviewed faceto- face; patients in medication-assisted treatment, patients not in medication-assisted treatment (in therapy without medication), and users (opioid-dependent persons not currently in therapy) received self-completion questionnaires. The survey found that treatment for opioid-dependent individuals in Portugal is currently judged to be good by patients and physicians. Access to treatment was reported to be easy by the majority of patients and physicians and there was a high level of satisfaction among patients. However, patient awareness of medication-assisted treatment options is currently sub-optimal in Portugal and doses of medication-assisted treatment were frequently low. The results of the ACCESS project, as far as medication-assisted treatment is concerned, are encouraging and highlight both the success areas and those that need to be improved in the future within the system of treatment for opioid-dependent individuals in Portugal. Project ACCESS provides a valuable assessment of attitudes and beliefs regarding medication-assisted treatment in Portugal. These data should help inform future decision-making to optimize responses to treatment at the patient and public health level.
24192094 Systematic screening for TORCH infections and group B Streptococcus (GBS) during pregnancy has been an important factor in the improvement of perinatal care. To evaluate TORCH serology and GBS carriers state in the population of a maternity, to assess variability with age and nationality and to search for congenital infections. Non-probabilistic prevalence study. 9508 TORCH and 2639 GBS results were registered. Immunity rate for rubella was 93.3%, higher for Portuguese women; for toxoplasmosis it was 25.7%, higher among the oldest and foreign women; IgG for CMV was positive in 62.4%, no influence of age was found. VDRL was reactive in 0.5%; HBsAg was found to be positive in 2.3%, higher in foreign women. Antibodies for hepatitis C virus and HIV were found respectively in 1.4% and 0.7%. No congenital infections were diagnosed. GBS carrier state was found in 13.9%. A high rate of positive IgG was found for rubella reflecting vaccines policy. For toxoplasmosis the low rate of positives means that a high number of pregnant women have to repeat serology during pregnancy with inherent costs. Like in the general population, a high rate of CMV positive mothers was found. For some infections we found that foreign women had different conditions. Knowledge on TORCH and GBS state helps to better draw guidelines concerning screening policies during pregnancy.
24192095 Several skin disorders, immunosuppression-induced, have been described in transplant recipients. The aim of our study is to characterize the clinical spectrum of skin disorders and to compare the findings in liver and kidney transplant recipients. A retrospective descriptive study was conducted. Data were collected from the medical records of all liver and kidney transplant recipients from 2000 - 2010 who had been referred to our Dermato-Venereology Department. Three hundred nineteen transplant recipients (23.5%) have been seen, resulting in 410 diagnoses (230 in the subpopulation of liver transplant recipients and 180 in the subpopulation of kidney transplant recipients) grouped into 4 categories: 1) cutaneous infections; 2) skin cancer or premalignant skin lesions; 3) cutaneous side-effects; 4) non-iatrogenic skin disorders. Cutaneous infections were the most common presentations (42.2%), on average 32.7 months after transplantation. The latter group included 20.5% of fungal, 12.7% viral and 8.5% bacterial infections. Skin cancer and premalignant skin lesions made up 11.7% of all diagnoses, over a mean of 44.8 months post transplant and occurring primarily in kidney transplant recipients (20.6% vs 4.8% in liver transplantation patients; P < 0.001). The kidney transplant population had a squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) to basal cell carcinoma (BCC) ratio of 1.3:1 with SCC predominance, and the liver transplant population had a BCC:SCC ratio of 3.5:1. We also identified 10.5% of cutaneous side-effects and 35.6% of non-iatrogenic skin disorders. Although neoplastic pathology is more frequently mentioned in the literature, cutaneous infections were the most common diagnoses in our study. The significant differences between the two subpopulations studied may be related to higher immunosuppression after kidney transplantation. The high number of skin disorders reported in these patients makes it essential for Dermato-Venereology to be included within the multidisciplinary post-transplant care provided.
24192096 Laparoscopic cholecystectomy is the gold standard procedure for the treatment of lithiasic gallblader pathology and acute cholecystitis. Whether or not it should be done as ambulatory surgery is still being discussed. The present study aims to analyze the quality and safety of laparoscopic cholecystectomy conducted by the Ambulatory Unit of Hospital de Braga and compare the results with those from other European surgical centers performing LC as ambulatory surgery. Observational prospective study of patients submitted to laparoscopic cholecystectomy in ambulatory surgery during a period of 26 months. Data regarding patients' demography, peri- and postoperative complications, surgical time, time in recovery room, and readmission rates was collected. A total of 231 patients were subjected to Laparoscopic cholecystectomy in the ambulatory unit with overnight stay (time to discharge less than 24 hours). Three patients presented with intra-operative complications, which needed conversion to laparotomy, and four patients were admitted after surgery. The mean time for the procedure was 58 minutes and the mean time for recovery was 19h19 minutes. Postoperative morbidity was 7.8% with 2 nonscheduled admission having occurred. One of the controversies regarding laparoscopic cholecystectomy as an outpatient procedure is the need for overnight hospital surveillance. In our unit, we have started LC on an outpatient basis with an overnight stay. Using this protocol, over the past two years, we have operated 231 patients and our results show that this is a completely safe technique. Data from the study suggests that LC is a safe technique when performed in ambulatory practice, having similar results to other european surgical centers.
24192097 In Portugal, new medical graduates undertake every year the Exame Nacional de Seriação, to be ranked for the available postgraduate residency posts within the National Health Service. Exame Nacional de Seriação is a multiple choice questions test on internal medicine. This study analyses the Exame Nacional de Seriação results between 2006 and 2011, to identify the variables that predict its score. Academic (graduating University, final classification) and biographic data (gender, nationality) of 8956 candidates were analyzed and related to the Exame Nacional de Seriação' score. A linear regression analysis was performed to determine the predictors of that score. There were significant differences in the proportion of candidates coming from each National Medical School attending the Exame Nacional de Seriação, and minor but significant discrepancies in their classification. The percentage of international medical graduates increased to 15% in the last two years. Candidates' gender, nationality (Portuguese or other), year of exam, graduating medical school and final graduating classification had a significant relation with ENS score, explaining 39% of Exame Nacional de Seriação' variance. Final graduating classification was the single most predictive variable, which correlation with Exame Nacional de Seriação' score varied between .679 and .586 across Portuguese Medical Schools, but was weak among candidates graduated abroad. Pregraduate training (Final Graduating Classification and Medical School) is related to Exame Nacional de Seriação' score, particularly among national graduates. This data might be relevant to understand the impact of the changes on Exame Nacional de Seriação about to be implemented.
24192098 Thyroid carcinoma is rare in children and young adults. Most of management guidelines are based in data from adult population. Several controversies remain regarding the aggressiveness of clinical presentation and therapeutic approach. To evaluate all differentiated thyroid carcinoma patients with less than 20 years-old at presentation reflecting the experience of our unit in relation to diagnosis, treatment and follow-up of this clinical entity. This is a retrospective review of clinical records of all children and young adults followed at Oncology Consultation of Department of Endocrinology of Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra between 1996 and 2012. Nineteen patients with mean age of 16 years old were followed, 13 girls and 6 boys. None of the patients had previous neck irradiation. A palpable cervical mass was the presenting complaint in 84.6%. FNA was performed in 15 patients and was diagnostic or suspicious of malignancy in 71.4%. Total thyroidectomy was performed in 18 cases (94.7%). Papillary carcinoma was identified in all. Vascular invasion and multicentry occurred in 21.1%. Mean tumor size was 2.5cm. Cervical lymph node involvement was diagnosed in 31.6% and distant metastases in 5.2%. The majority of patients (18 in 19) were classified as stage I disease. All patients received thyroxine suppressive therapy and postoperative radioiodine ablation was given to 84.2% (mean dose 85.7mCi). During mean follow-up of almost 6 years, 16 patients remain disease free. In our series, cervical lymph node and distant metastases rates were similar to that found in adult population. Overall prognosis was very good.
24192099 Zebrafish (Danio rerio) is an ideal model organism for the study of vertebrate development. This is due to the large clutches that each couple produces, with up to 200 embryos every 7 days, and to the fact that the embryos and larvae are small, transparent and undergo rapid external development. Using scientific literature research tools available online and the keywords Zebrafish, biomedical research, human disease, and drug screening, we reviewed original studies and reviews indexed in PubMed. In this review we summarized work conducted with this model for the advancement of our knowledge related to several human diseases. We also focused on the biomedical research being performed in Portugal with the zebrafish model. Powerful live imaging and genetic tools are currently available for zebrafish making it a valuable model in biomedical research. The combination of these properties with the optimization of automated systems for drug screening has transformed the zebrafish into 'a top model' in biomedical research, drug discovery and toxicity testing. Furthermore, with the optimization of xenografts technology it will be possible to use zebrafish to aide in the choice of the best therapy for each patient. Zebrafish is an excellent model organism in biomedical research, drug development and in clinical therapy.
24192100 During pregnancy immunological, metabolic, hormonal and vascular changes occur, and can cause specific skin diseases. The specific dermatoses of pregnancy have undergone numerous changes in nomenclature and classification, partly due to advances in the knowledge of the pathogenesis of these skin diseases. Currently the following diseases are considered specific dermatoses of pregnancy: pemphigoid gestations, polymorphic eruption of pregnancy, intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy and atopic eruption of pregnancy. Timely diagnosis and specific and safe treatment are essential to prevent complications which, although rare, may be associated with significant maternal-fetal comorbidity.
24192101 Psoriasis is a common, chronic and systemic inflammatory disease associated with several comorbidities, such as obesity, hypertension, diabetes, dyslipidaemia and metabolic syndrome, but also with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease, like myocardial infarction or stroke. The chronic inflammatory nature of psoriasis has been suggested to be a contributing and potentially independent risk factor for the development of cardiovascular comorbidities and precocious atherosclerosis. Aiming at alerting clinicians to the need of screening and monitoring cardiovascular diseases and its risk factors in psoriatic patients, this review will focus on the range of cardiometabolic comorbidities and increased risk of cardiovascular disease associated with psoriasis.
24192102 Secondary immunodeficiences are associated with an increased incidence of infection and malignancy, as well with development of autoimmune disease. Immune system function is altered by many conditions, such as aging, malnutrition and mycobacterial infections. However, the treatment of the primary condition often results in the improvement of the immune compromise. The authors present a case of cytomegalovirus encephalitis and hepatitis, due to viral reactivation associated with development of secondary immunodeficience in an HIV-negative patient.
24192103 Acute Panmyelosis with myelofibrosis is a rare and aggressive acute myeloid leukemia accounting for 2% of all acute leukemias. Clinically, it is characterized by an acute onset of cytopenias associated with extensive bone marrow fibrosis in the absence of splenomegaly and related morphological changes in the red blood cells such as dacryocytes. The presence of fibrosis further complicates the correct diagnosis of this rare disease, being important to differentiate this entity from other hematologic malignancies such as other acute myeloid leukemias and myelodysplastic syndromes associated with myelofibrosis. We report a case of a young adult of 16 years old, admitted with severe pancytopenia. The exposure of this case is justified by the rarity of this pathology associated with few cases reported in medical literature, allowing for a clinical sharing and a better understanding of the different clinical aspects of this entity of difficult diagnosis.
24192104 The ejaculatory ducts obstruction is an uncommon finding in the study of infertility male factor. We present two cases referred to our department for conjugal infertility, with proven male factor (low ejaculate volume and azoospermia). On physical examination there was no abnormality in both patients. Imaging studies demonstrated intra-prostatic cystic structure, causing ejaculatory ducts dilation. We performed transurethral resection of the ejaculatory ducts. Semen analysis 3 months postoperatively showed 1 case of normalization and 1 case of improvement in sperm count parameters. The couple 1 couple has 2 children, without medical assisted reproductive techniques. The couple 2 had one pregnancy after Intracytoplasmic Sperm Injection, from the ejaculate. This diagnosis depends on a strong clinical suspicion and is of high importance, since this disease has effective surgical treatment. The authors aim to highlight the relevance of the assessment andrological when studying marital infertility.
26849750 Helicobacter pylori infection is a risk factor for gastric adenocarcinoma. Identification of individuals with this infection and its eradication may be considered as a primary prevention strategy to reduce the incidence of gastric adenocarcinoma; however, the magnitude of benefit and the effectiveness of this strategy are still unclear. A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials was conducted comparing the incidence of gastric adenocarcinoma in infected individuals submitted to Helicobacter pylori eradication and individuals not submitted to this therapy. The results of the six included randomized clinical trials (all conducted in countries with high gastric cancer incidence) suggest that Helicobacter pylori eradication is associated with a relative risk reduction of 34% in gastric cancer incidence. However, generalization of the results to countries with lower gastric cancer incidence should be cautious and the cost-effectiveness of this strategy in this context remains uncertain.
26849751 Primary health care professionals are in a privileged position to recognize and manage cases of suspected elder abuse. The purpose of this study was to provide some insight of these professionals' views and knowledge on this subject. A questionnaire was elaborated and sent to physicians and nursing staff practicing in 12 different health care units in Coimbra. The data collected included parameters related to demography, perception of abuse and management strategies, personal experience and training on this subject. The global response rate was 67.9% corresponding to 127 validated questionnaires. From the results found, we highlight the following: there was a significant contact between these professionals and older people; most (64.6%) considered the abuse as more prevalent in the familiar context and 32.3% signed negligence as the most common type; the majority of professionals considered themselves as useful (97.6%); the uncertainty in the diagnosis was one of the most important causes for non-reporting; there were doubts concerning mandatory report of abuse to judicial authorities. It was also found that 87.4% of the respondents stated they would feel more comfortable having formal protocol to handle these cases and this subject was not included in the training curriculum of 70.9% of the respondents. The significant contact between older population and health care professionals allows for an early diagnose and intervention. The professionals showed knowledge in accordance to some studies, namely, as to the context and prevalence of abuse. Doubts as to the best way to manage these cases could be solved by implementing protocols and by specific training, which is a fundamental cornerstone for preparing professionals to deal with these kind of cases. Health care professionals seemed to be aware of the relevance of elder abuse, as well as the importance of their role in preventing and diagnosing these abuses. However, a more extensive approach on this subject during clinical training and the definition of general clinical guidelines are important to increase the professionals' confidence in managing suspected cases.
26849752 The identification of genotypes was essential for the prognosis and treatment of hepatitis C virus chronic patients in recent years. The aims of the study were to know the frequency of genotypes diagnosed in the last six years at the laboratory, and reveal the contribution of an in-house assay for molecular characterization of viruses. The genotyping of hepatitis C virus by LiPA was performed in 923 samples, mostly from male individuals. The subtyping of hepatitis C virus by an in-house assay to target regions in the Core/E1 and/or NS5B was performed in 112 samples. We observed a high prevalence of genotype 1 (56.6%), with a frequency of subtype 1a four times higher compared to 1b. All cases of genotype 3 (27.5%) were subtype 3a. For the cases of genotype 4 (12.9%), it were identified subtypes 4a (65.5%), 4d (31%), 4b (1.7%) and 4c (1.7%). Recombinants intragenotype 2, the RF1_2k/1b, and mixed infections, were also identified. The most prevalent subtypes (1a and 3a) obtained are usually described in injecting drug users. Although most of the samples analysed match to inmates (78.4%), we cannot exclude any possible risk behaviors associated with illicit drug use. The high prevalence of subtype 1a, the frequency and diversity of genotype 4, and the identification of recombined virus suggest modification of the molecular pattern of hepatitis C virus infection described in the past. The in-house assay proved to be useful for the correct classification of hepatitis C virus and improving knowledge about the diversity of virus circulating in the country.
26849753 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and asthma affect almost 300 million individuals. Inhaled therapy is often associated with technical errors reducing efficacy and compliance. To evaluate the inhalation technique and its relation with clinical and functional control in asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Analytical cross-sectional study including patients with asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease treated with any type of inhaler device. Demographic data and inquiry about previous teaching of inhalation technique were collected in all participants. Inhalation technique was evaluated in: Step 1 - device activation; Step 2 - previous expiration; Step 3 - inspiration; Step 4 - end inspiratory pause. Clinical control was assessed from the questionnaires Asthma Control Test, Control of Allergic Rhinitis and Asthma Test, modified Medical Research Council and Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Assessment Test. Spirometric evaluation was performed in all participants. From a total of 62 subjects, 74.19% made at least one error, mainly during step 2 (53.2%). Previous education on inhalation technique was associated with lower number of errors (p = 0.014). There was no association between number of errors and age (p = 0.321), years of diagnosis (p = 0.119) or spirometric evaluation (p > 0.05). In asthma an association was found between number of errors and Asthma Control Test (p = 0.032) and Control of Allergic Rhinitis and Asthma Test (p = 0.008). Teaching inhalation technique has a positive impact on its future performance. Most patients make mistakes, affecting clinical control in asthma, although in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease no relation was found. This is an ongoing work that aims to reevaluate inhalation technique after patients' education and its further impact.
26849754 To analyze the prevalence of congenital anomalies detected at birth among children of pregnant adolescents, emphasizing the most common types and the time of diagnosis. Retrospective study of type census, in which were analyzed in all newborns, living or dead, weighing more than 500 g of women who gave birth at Hospital São Paulo in a period of six years. The fetuses bearing anomalies were identified prenatally or through postnatal physical examination period, according to the criteria of the Latin American Collaborative Study of Congenital Malformations. The results were expressed descriptively using absolute and relative values, the prevalence of anomalies was calculated, as well as the comparison between groups using nonparametric tests. We analyzed 6 257 pregnancies, of which 577 newborns had some congenital anomaly identified at birth (prevalence 9.2%). Among these 6 257, 907 were adolescents, which showed a 9.9% prevalence of anomalies among their newborns. There was no significant difference between the presence of abnormalities in newborns of adolescents and women with age greater than or equal to 20 years. About 56% of congenital anomalies were diagnosed in the prenatal period. We observed a higher prevalence of defects of neural tube between newborns of adolescents (p = 0.027). We observed high rate of deliveries in adolescents, higher than developed countries. We observed also high frequency of congenital anomalies in newborns, probably because our tertiary reference center. The high prevalence of neural tube defect among young pregnant women could be explained by the absent of acid folic supplementation in non-planned gestations which is typical of adolescents. The prevalence and time of diagnosis of congenital anomalies showed similar behavior among newborns of teenagers and women with age greater than or equal to 20 years, except for the defects of the neural tube, which were more prevalent among newborns of teenagers.
26849755 This study aims to assess the impact of psychiatric education on attitudes of medical students towards psychiatric patients. A cross-sectional survey of medical students was conducted at the biggest Portuguese medical school. The students completed an anonymous self-report questionnaire, including sociodemographic data, family history of psychiatric illness, and the Community Attitudes toward the Mentally Ill scale. Of the 2 178 students, 398 answered the survey, representing 18.2% of the whole medical school. There was a significant improvement in all Community Attitudes toward the Mentally Ill scale dimensions along the medical course. The higher scores were in Restrictiveness subscale (38.01), and the lower scores were for Authoritarianism (36.13). The best improvement along the course was for Authoritarianism (5th year score - 1st year score = 2.03), and the worse was for Benevolence (5th year score - 1st year score = 0.39). The biggest improvement, in all scores, was found at the end of the 3rd year. The authors propose that the better attitudes found on third year students were due to a very specific anti-stigma module on the theoretical discipline 'Introduction to Mental Health'. After that, this positive effect was lost, with fourth and fifth year medical students showing a worsening of their attitudes. Our results highlight the importance of anti-stigma specific education modules in order to improve students' attitudes toward mental health. Thus more anti-stigma preventive measures can be taken onward, on preparing the best way possible, the next generation of doctors.
26849756 This myelodysplastic syndromes are a heterogeneous entity characterized by dysplasia, hypercellular bone marrow, cytopenias and risk of transformation to acute leukaemia. Prognostic factors, such as bone marrow fibrosis, lactate dehydrogenase and 2-microglobulin elevation have been described, but treatment is mainly based in the International Prognostic Scoring System. Our aim was to analyze serum's erythropoietin at diagnosis in de novo myelodysplastic syndromes patients, through its impact in overall survival and possible implementation as prognostic marker. Clinical and laboratorial data from 102 patients with de novo myelodysplastic syndromes diagnosed between October/2009 and March/2014 were collected. Survival analysis was performed according to serum erythropoietin level stratification, using Kaplan-Meier methodology. Our 102 patients had a median age of 74 years, with a male:female ratio of 0.8. Mean erythropoietin was significantly lower in refractory cytopenia with unilineage dysplasia patients in contrast with the higher values observed in 5q- syndrome (p < 0.05). Eleven patients progressed to acute leukaemia; these have higher mean erythropoietin values (p < 0.05). In addition, elevated serum erythropoietin was associated with lower survival rates (p = 0.0336). Predictive value of serum erythropoietin was maintained after Cox regression adjustment. In multivariate analysis, serum erythropoietin is an independent survival predictor (p < 0.001). Serum erythropoietin is a predictive factor for response to therapy with subcutaneous erythropoietin, and patients with myelodysplastic syndromes with higher values of erythropoietin have poorer response to administration of erythropoietin even at higher doses. Our sample shows that serum erythropoietin also has prognostic value, and in all myelodysplastic syndromes subtypes. Moreover, alone or in combination with other factors or prognostic indices, erythropoietin may enhance the prognostic indices such as the International Prognostic Scoring System, since high levels are associated with progression to acute leukemia and hence lower survival. This study suggests that increased erythropoietin levels at diagnosis can by itself be a poor prognosis factor inmyelodysplastic syndromes patients, with higher values in patients with progression to acute leukaemia and decreased overall survival.
26849757 Although vitamin D deficiency is increasingly recognized around the world, there are few studies on the Portuguese reality. This study aims to analyse vitamin D levels in the assays performed in our hospital and their relationship with age, genre, requesting specialty and moment of sample collection. Cross-sectional study of measurements of 25(HO)D performed in our Hospital between June 2012 and November 2014. Included variables: gender, age, requesting specialty, month of sample collection. Vitamin D status classified as: 'Deficiency' (≤ 20 ng/mL), 'Insufficiency' (21 - 29 ng/ml) and 'Sufficiency' (≥ 30 ng/mL). We included 5 439 assays; 55.0% from women; the median age was 64.0 years. Sixty per cent had 'Deficiency', 20.7% 'Insufficiency' and 18.9% 'Sufficiency'. We found a negative correlation between age and vitamin D level (p < 0.001). We didn't find differences in vitamin D levels between genres. Nine specialties requested 98% of the assays, namely Nephrology (56.2%). We found differences between specialties based on age and vitamin D level (p < 0.001). Vitamin D levels changed throughout the year, with higher levels in the summer, followed by autumn, spring and winter (p < 0.001). Despite this seasonal fluctuation, vitamin D sufficiency was only present in a minority of assays (27.8% in summer and 9.2% in winter). Vitamin D deficiency is prevalent in this population, affects individuals of all ages and is not offset by the seasonal variation of sunlight. Vitamin D deficiency is a real and prevalent problem in our population that needs further attention and action, given its clinical implications.
26849758 Our objective is to determine which complications lead to reoperation, and the outcomes of reoperation using laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding, laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass and laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy at Centro Hospitalar de São João. Observational study. Patients included were aged 18 to 65 years at first gastric banding, underwent removal from March 21st 2007 to January 23rd 2014 and were subsequently converted to gastric banding, gastric bypass or sleeve gastrectomy. Women who got pregnant during the initial gastric banding follow-up and patients that performed more than one conversion were excluded. A total of 103 patients were included. Fifteen underwent revision to gastric banding, 71 to gastric bypass and 17 to sleeve gastrectomy. Respectively, percentage of excess weight loss at 1 month were 1.9 ± 12.2% in 6 patients, 36.9 ± 18.2% in 49 patients and 27.1% (13.3 - 68.6) in 11 patients (laparoscopic adjustable-gastric banding-laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass p < 0.001, laparoscopic adjustable-gastric banding-laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy p = 0.002 and laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass-laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy p = 0.474). At 3 months there were 12.8% (5.7 - 84.8) in 6 patients, 44.8 ± 19.7% in 24 patients and 48 ± 20.1% in 8 patients (laparoscopic adjustable-gastric banding-laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass p = 0.017, laparoscopic adjustable-gastric banding-laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy p = 0.039 and laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass-laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy p = 0.691). At revision, ages and body mass indices are higher than other studies. Gastric bypass is the preferred revision surgery, because combines restriction and malabsorption, surgeons have more experience and long term outcomes are better described. The main indications for reoperation were inadequate weight loss (37.4%) and band slippage (30%). At short term, in our patients, gastric banding as a revision surgery was not effective, as opposed to gastric bypass and sleeve gastrectomy.
26849759 In Portugal, the incidence of complicated infection by varicella-zoster virus is unknown. The purpose of this study was to describe the epidemiological and clinical features of complicated infection by varicella-zoster virus in children. Retrospective review of the clinical files of patients admitted between January 1999 and July 2013, with a diagnosis of complicated varicella-zoster virus infection. Ninety-four patients were hospitalized with complicated varicella-zoster virus infection, two of them by reactivation of latent infection. The median age was 38 (IQR 18 - 65) months. The most frequent types of complications were bacterial overinfection of the skin and subcutaneous cellular tissue (37.2%) and respiratory complications (24.5%). Other complications were neurologic complications (19.1%), gastrointestinal (9.6%), hematologic (5.3%) and osteoarticular (4.3%). In 38 patients invasive bacterial infections were diagnosed, with bacteremia in 6 patients. The median age was highest in the immunological complications compared with infectious complications. Neurological complications occurred mainly in healthy children, while infectious complications, including the invasive bacterial infections were more frequent in patients treated with ibuprofen and/or corticosteroids. The evolution was favorable in most cases. The complications of varicella-zoster virus infection occurred mainly in pre-school age and in healthy children. Infectious complications, particularly respiratory complications and bacterial overinfection of the skin and subcutaneous cellular tissue, were the most frequent. There was association between infectious complications and previous therapy with ibuprofen and / or corticosteroids. Multicenter studies should be planned in order to optimize and adjust the vaccine strategies to our reality.
26849760 The relationship between lymphomas and autoimmune diseases has been reported as bi-directional, however there is a few data in pediatric population. The aim of this work is to evaluate the prevalence of autoimmune diseases in children and adolescents with Hodgkin's lymphoma followed in a Pediatric Oncology Unit. By reviewing Hodgkin's lymphomas data from the past 16 years (collected prospectively), an apparently large incidence of autoimmune diseases, mostly in female patients, was noted. We decided to do this retrospective study with an update on follow-up. Data analyzed: age, gender, autoimmune disease, temporal relation with lymphoma, lymphoma's stage, histologic subtype and treatment. Fifty-two cases were included, 7 (13.5%) of which, all female, had an autoimmune disease diagnosed previously, simultaneously or after lymphoma. Autoimmune diseases were: juvenile idiopathic arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease, Behçet's disease, autoimmune hepatitis, systemic erythematosus lupus, Hashimoto's thyroiditis and idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura. The diagnosis was made after lymphoma in 4 patients, before in 2 and simultaneously in 1 patient. All cases, except the one with simultaneous diagnosis, are out of treatment and without oncologic disease relapse. No deaths were registered. There was an important prevalence of autoimmune diseases in girls with Hodgkin's lymphoma. We present data and discuss the possible causes based on a literature review. This relationship should be invoked, requiring more studies, especially in pediatric age.
26849761 Clinical guidelines are support tools, aiming to improve quality of the clinical practice. Patient centered care allows best satisfaction rates, with greater health self-management, and potential gains in quality with fewer costs. To evaluate the integration of patients' values in Portuguese guidelines. We reviewed the 18 guidelines about cardiovascular diseases published in Portugal from 2011 to 2013, searching for the integration of patients' ideas, fears, expectations and preferences. Eight guidelines were related to diagnosis approach and 10 with treatment. We found references to patients' values in 5 (28%) guidelines, all about treatment aspects. The incorporation of patients' expectations was the most present feature. Reference to financial costs was present in 78% of the guidelines. Clinical guidelines are health technology instruments available to practitioners in order to improve the quality of care provided to patients, who are the real users of these tools. As in other countries, there is a tendency to disregard the users' value systems in the conception of the guidelines, giving the privilege to a population logic, not always applicable to the individual, and to financial arithmetic with low support in cost-effectiveness assessments. In the Portuguese case, the way guidelines were proposed conditioned also some suspicion both in the professionals and in the users. Portuguese guidelines have low incorporation of references to patients' values. This is more evident when questions about diagnosis are addressed, placing patients in a secondary role in the clinical decision-making process with potential losses in quality of care and eventual increase in costs.
26849762 Zika virus is a flavivirus related to Dengue virus, yellow fever virus and West Nile virus. It is considered an emerging arbovirus transmitted by mosquitos of the genus Aedes. Its first description took place in 1947 in the Zika Forest in Uganda, isolated on Rhesus monkey used as bait to study the yellow fever virus. Sporadic cases have been detected in African countries and at the end of the 70's in Indonesia. In 2007, epidemics were described in Micronesia and other islands in the Pacific Ocean and more recently in Brazil. Clinical picture is characterized as a 'dengue-like' syndrome, with abrupt onset of fever and an early onset evanescent rash, often pruritic. Occasionally the disease has been associated with Guillain-Barré syndrome. Nevertheless, until now deaths and complications caused by the disease were not reported. The diagnosis can be performed by PCR or by IgG and IgM antibodies detection. The rapid spread of the virus and its epidemic potential are especially problematic in countries where there are the circulation of other arboviruses which imposes difficulties in the differential diagnosis and healthcare burden. Control measures are the same recommended for dengue and chikungunya which are based in health education and vector control.
26849763 Atrial fibrillation is the most common chronic arrhythmia in clinical practice, which is associated with a well known increased thromboembolic risk. The use of oral anticoagulants in this context is well established. However, there are some gaps in information that warrant further studies, such as the duration of an atrial fibrillation event that is long enough to increase the risk of embolic phenomena. This may be of important clinical concern, particularly in patients with cardiac implanted devices, in which very short periods of asymptomatic atrial fibrillation are often detected. We performed a critical review on the association of brief atrial fibrillation episodes and thromboembolic events, based on available literature indexed on PubMed. After initial selection of abstracts and checking of references a final pool of 8 papers were analysed; seven describing studies with cardiac implanted devices and one with Holter monitoring. Four of the studies addressed this issue with a 'daily burden' approach rather than single episode duration. The risk increases with the magnitude of atrial fibrillation burden, with 5 minutes of atrial fibrillation in one day being the shortest time shown to independently predict thromboembolic events. The formation of an intracardiac thrombus, and respective embolic potential, is a dynamic process resulting from the interaction of anatomical and functional variables. The individual risk will depend on these factors. The association between embolic events and short atrial fibrillation episodes is evident, although the mechanism is not obvious, given the time discrepancy that is frequently observed between atrial fibrillation episode and clinical event. An atrial fibrillation burden of 5 minutes in one day has been shown to be independently associated with a significantly increased risk, although the cause-effect mechanism is not clear. A standardized way to select patients with short-duration atrial fibrillation periods that will have a meaningful benefit of chronic oral anticoagulation is still to define. Therefore, decisions should be made in an individualized manner.
26849765 Aneurysmal bone cysts are benign musculoskeletal tumours, which occur in young patients and, occasionally, with aggressive behaviour. Those tumours very often will need surgical treatment with curettage and bone grafting, but for aggressive lesions, inbloc resection is more advisable. Aggressive tumours use to be large and sometimes with difficult surgical approach and demanding complex surgical reconstructions. In this scenario, selective arterial embolization is a possible primary or adjuvant treatment option. This paper presents a paradigmatic case, where selective arterial embolization allowed a successful treatment of a large aneurysmal bone cyst with difficult surgical resolution.
26849768 Anaphylaxis has a growing incidence, especially in children. It represents a medical emergency and its successful therapy depends on early and proper intervention. Intramuscular epinephrine, with dose adjustment according to weight and age, is the drug of choice for anaphylaxis treatment. After resolution of the acute reaction, the patient should be kept under clinical surveillance for 6 to 24 hours, due to possible biphasic reactions. Prescription of an epinephrine auto injectable device should be considered in all patients with diagnosed or suspected anaphylaxis; additionally these patients should always be referred to an Immunoallergy consultation, to perform adequate investigation and management in order to reduce future risk. All anaphylaxis episodes must be recorded in The Portuguese Catalogue of Allergies and other Adverse Reactions (Catálogo Português de Alergias e outras Reações Adversas, CPARA), which represents a fundamental tool to share clinical information within the Health System. The present manuscript intends to disclose the most recent Portuguese guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of anaphylaxis, making its clinical approach more effective and homogeneous, and to promote the use of The Portuguese Catalogue of Allergies and other Adverse Reactions as an essential tool to register and share information on anaphylaxis in Portugal.
27777472 To describe the main tomography findings in patients diagnosed with pulmonary infection caused by <i>Mycobacterium kansasii</i>. Retrospective study of computed tomography scans of 19 patients with pulmonary infection by <i>M. kansasii</i>. Of the 19 patients evaluated, 10 (52.6%) were male and 9 (47.4%) were female. The mean age of the patients was 58 years (range, 33-76 years). Computed tomography findings were as follows: architectural distortion, in 17 patients (89.5%); reticular opacities and bronchiectasis, in 16 (84.2%); cavities, in 14 (73.7%); centrilobular nodules, in 13 (68.4%); small consolidations, in 10 (52.6%); atelectasis and large consolidations, in 9 (47.4%); subpleural blebs and emphysema, in 6 (31.6%); and adenopathy, in 1 (5.3%). There was a predominance of cavities, as well as of involvement of the small and large airways. The airway disease was characterized by bronchiectasis and bronchiolitis presenting as centrilobular nodules.
27777473 To describe and quantify the main changes seen on computed tomography of the chest in mildly symptomatic adult patients with sickle cell disease, as well as to evaluate the radiologist accuracy in determining the type of hemoglobinopathy. A prospective study involving 44 adult patients with sickle cell disease who underwent inspiration and expiration computed tomography of the chest. The frequency of tomography findings and the extent of involvement are reported. We also calculated radiologist accuracy in determining the type of hemoglobinopathy by analyzing the pulmonary alterations and morphology of the spleen. The changes found on computed tomography scans, in descending order of frequency, were as follows: fibrotic opacities (81.8%); mosaic attenuation (56.8%); architectural distortion (31.8%); cardiomegaly (25.0%); lobar volume reduction (18.2%); and increased caliber of peripheral pulmonary arteries (9.1%). For most of the findings, the involvement was considered mild, five or fewer lung segments being affected. The accuracy in determining the type of hemoglobinopathy (HbSS group versus not HbSS group) was 72.7%. In adult patients with sickle cell disease, the main tomography findings reflect fibrotic changes. In addition, computed tomography can be helpful in differentiating among hemoglobinopathies.
27777474 The objective of this study was to determine the incidence of a 'meniscoid' superior labrum. This was a retrospective analysis of 582 magnetic resonance imaging examinations of shoulders. Of those 582 examinations, 110 were excluded, for a variety of reasons, and the final analysis therefore included 472 cases. Consensus readings were performed by three musculoskeletal radiologists using specific criteria to diagnose meniscoid labra. A meniscoid superior labrum was identified in 48 (10.2%) of the 472 cases evaluated. Arthroscopic proof was available in 21 cases (43.8%). In 10 (47.6%) of those 21 cases, the operative report did not include the mention a superior labral tear, thus suggesting the presence of a meniscoid labrum. In only one of those cases were there specific comments about a mobile superior labrum (i.e., meniscoid labrum). In the remaining 11 (52.4%), surgical correlation demonstrated superior labral tears. A meniscoid superior labrum is not an infrequent finding. Depending upon assumptions and the requirement of surgical proof, the prevalence of a meniscoid superior labrum in this study was between 2.1% (surgically proven) and 4.8% (projected). However, superior labral tears are just as common and are often confused with meniscoid labra.
27777475 To show the morphometric patterns of lymph nodes of the head and neck, evaluating their number, shape, dimensions, hilum, and cortex, through the use of ultrasound examination of the neck. We analyzed 400 right and left lymph nodes in a group of 20 healthy young and middle-aged individuals of both genders. In the ultrasound examination, we observed the following lymph nodes: mastoid; parotid (superficial, extraglandular, and intraglandular); submandibular (preglandular, retroglandular, and intracapsular); submental; and cervical (anterior and posterior). Although some individuals had up to seven lymph nodes in the same region, most had only two to three per region. The smallest lymph node diameter observed was 0.4 cm, and the largest was 2.7 cm. Most lymph nodes showed an elongated or oval shape. Most of the lymph node hila were echogenic, although a few were hyperechoic. However, the cortex was clearly hypoechoic in all of the lymph nodes evaluated. Ultrasound examination of healthy individuals allowed the characteristics of the lymph nodes of the head and neck to be observed clearly, which could provide a basis for the analysis of patients with diseases of these lymph nodes.
27777476 To compare duplex ultrasound and computed tomography (CT) angiography in terms of their performance in detecting endoleaks, as well as in determining the diameter of the aneurysm sac, in the postoperative follow-up of endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair. This was a prospective study involving 30 patients who had undergone endovascular repair of infrarenal aortoiliac aneurysms. Duplex ultrasound and CT angiography were performed simultaneously by independent radiologists. Measurements of the aneurysm sac diameter were assessed, and the presence or absence of endoleaks was determined. The average diameter of the aneurysm sac, as determined by duplex ultrasound and CT angiography was 6.09 ± 1.95 and 6.27 ± 2.16 cm, respectively. Pearson's correlation coefficient showing a statistically significant correlation (<i>R</i> = 0.88; <i>p</i> < 0.01). Comparing the duplex ultrasound and CT angiography results regarding the detection of endoleaks, we found that the former had a negative predictive value of 92.59% and a specificity of 96.15%. Our results show that there is little variation between the two methods evaluated, and that the choice between the two would have no significant effect on clinical management. Duplex ultrasound could replace CT angiography in the postoperative follow-up of endovascular aneurysm repair of the infrarenal aorta, because it is a low-cost procedure without the potential clinical complications related to the use of iodinated contrast and exposure to radiation.
27777477 To measure the scattered radiation dose at different positions simulating hip surgery. We simulated fluoroscopy-assisted hip surgery in order to study the distribution of scattered radiation in the operating room. To simulate the patient, we used a anthropomorphic whole-body phantom, and we used an X-ray-specific detector to quantify the radiation. Radiographs were obtained with a mobile C-arm X-ray system in continuous scan mode, with the tube at 0º (configuration 1) or 90º (configuration 2). The operating parameters employed (voltage, current, and exposure time) were determined by a statistical analysis based on the observation of orthopedic surgical procedures involving the hip. For all measurements, higher exposures were observed in configuration 2. In the measurements obtained as a function of height, the maximum dose rates observed were 1.167 (± 0.023) µSv/s and 2.278 (± 0.023) µSv/s in configurations 1 and 2, respectively, corresponding to the chest level of health care professionals within the operating room. Proximal to the patient, the maximum values were recorded in the position occupied by the surgeon. We can conclude that, in the scenario under study, health care professionals workers are exposed to low levels of radiation, and that those levels can be reduced through the use of personal protective equipment.
27777478 Gestational trophoblastic disease is an abnormality of pregnancy that encompasses a group of diseases that differ from each other in their propensity for regression, invasion, metastasis, and recurrence. In the past, it was common for patients with molar pregnancy to present with marked symptoms: copious bleeding; theca lutein cysts; uterus larger than appropriate for gestational age; early preeclampsia; hyperemesis gravidarum; and hyperthyroidism. Currently, with early diagnosis made by ultrasound, most patients are diagnosed while the disease is still in the asymptomatic phase. In cases of progression to trophoblastic neoplasia, staging-typically with Doppler flow studies of the pelvis and chest X-ray, although occasionally with computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging-is critical to the choice of an appropriate antineoplastic therapy regimen. Because it is an unusual and serious disease that affects women of reproductive age, as well as because its appropriate treatment results in high cure rates, it is crucial that radiologists be familiar with gestational trophoblastic disease, in order to facilitate its early diagnosis and to ensure appropriate follow-up imaging.
27777480 Abdominal vascular syndromes are rare diseases. Although such syndromes vary widely in terms of symptoms and etiologies, certain imaging findings are characteristic. Depending on their etiology, they can be categorized as congenital-including blue rubber bleb nevus syndrome, Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome, and hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (Rendu-Osler-Weber syndrome)-or compressive-including 'nutcracker' syndrome, median arcuate ligament syndrome, Cockett syndrome (also known as May-Thurner syndrome), and superior mesenteric artery syndrome. In this article, we aimed to illustrate imaging findings that are characteristic of these syndromes, through studies conducted at our institution, as well as to perform a brief review of the literature on this topic.
27777481 We report a case of an uncommon thoracic aorta anomaly-right aortic arch with aberrant left innominate artery arising from Kommerell's diverticulum-that went undiagnosed until adulthood.
29213368 The serial position effect occurs when individuals are asked to recall a list of information that exceeds normal attention span. Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients show lower scores on word span recall tests when compared to healthy aging subjects, younger individuals or depressed patients. To evaluate the immediate free recall and the serial position effect of a 10-word list, emotionally neutral in tone, in Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients and two age-groups of healthy controls. The free word recall test was applied in a sample of 44 mild AD outpatients and 168 >50 year and 173 =50 year-old healthy controls. The span of recalled words and order of recollection of each item was recorded. Scores for serial position effect were analyzed.MMSE scores were recorded for all participants. Descriptive statistics and the ANOVA with Tukey test were performed. The controls scored significantly better than AD patients on the MMSE and word span (p=0.0001). Older controls word span mean ±SD was 5.65±1.75, younger controls was 5.99±1.27, and AD patients was 2.86±1.42. The best recalled item in all groups was the first item of the list. Primacy was observed across the three groups, although AD patients presented lower scores. Recency was diminished among AD patients compared to control groups. Primacy effect was observed in AD patients as well as in both normal control groups. Recency effect was presented by the normal control groups but was extremely poor among AD patients. The first item was universally best retrieved.
29213478 The Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) is a short global cognitive scale, and some studies suggest it is useful for evaluating cognition in patients with Parkinson's disease (PD). However, its accuracy has been questioned in studies involving patients with low education. We sought to assess whether some of the MoCA subtests contribute to the low accuracy of the test. We performed a cross-sectional retrospective analysis of clinical data in a cohort of 71 patients with PD, most with less than 8 years of education. Patients were examined using the MDS-UPDRS, Hoehn and Yahr and the MoCA. The data were analyzed using mainly descriptive statistics. We analyzed the data of 66 patients that were not demented according to the clinical evaluation and classified them using the proposed cut-off MoCA scores for diagnosis of MCI and dementia. Thirteen patients (19.7%) were classified as having normal cognition, 24 (36.3%) MCI and 29 (43.9%) dementia. Patients with dementia had longer disease duration (p=0.016) and lower education (p=0.0001). Total MoCA scores had a an almost normal distribution with a wide range of scores and only one maximum score. Performance on the MoCA was highly correlated with education (correlation coefficient=0.66, p=0.0001). At least five of the 10 MoCA subtests showed significant floor effects. We believe that some of the MoCA subtests may be too difficult to be completed by PD patients with low educational level, thus contributing to the test's poor diagnostic accuracy.
29213592 Memory complaints are common in elderly, and may be associated with many clinical problems. To identify clinical conditions and possible factors related to memory complaints in elderly outpatients presenting at a tertiary unit. Patients with memory complaints and normal cognitive screening tests were submitted to clinical and laboratorial testing. Radiological evaluation was performed as needed for diagnosis. One hundred and seventy-seven subjects were initially evaluated, 12 were excluded because of poor and inconsistent memory complaints. Of the remainder, seventeen had criteria for dementia diagnosis. Ninety-two (55.4%) had one or more comorbid conditions possibly related to their complaints. Major depression was present in 26.0%. Sixteen patients (9.6%) had vitamin B12 deficiency, 8 were in use of inappropriate medications, and 7 (4.2%) had hypothyroidism. Other conditions diagnosed were: generalized anxiety disorder, obstructive sleep apnea syndrome, hyperparathyroidism, normal pressure hydrocephalus. Three patients had severe hearing loss (in 22 with hearing complaints); one had severe visual impairment (in 22 with visual complaints). Comprehensive evaluation was able to identify treatable conditions possibly related to memory complaints.
29213700 Cognitive Neuropsychology aims to understand the processing mechanisms of normal and injured brain, by means of functional architectural models of information processing. Naming is one of the most important abilities in linguistic processing. Naming of different semantic and grammatical categories differ in their lexical properties and have distinct neuroanatomical substrates. We reviewed literature data on the differences between nouns and verbs in aphasic subjects reported by scientific publications in the form of indexed articles. Studies on naming abilities tended to emphasize the differentiation between nouns and verbs both in their lexical properties and neuroanatomical substrates. Functional neuroimaging studies have improved the state of knowledge regarding category-specific naming abilities, but further studies on different types of aphasia and the use of naming abilities in different contexts are warranted.
29213819 Among the instruments to evaluate semantic memory, the Pyramids and Palm Trees (PPT) and the Kissing and Dancing (KDT) tests are widely used but none have a performance referential for cognitively normal and impaired Brazilian populations. [A] To study these two tests in a sample of young healthy Brazilian individuals living in São Paulo; [B] To apply the results to the evaluation of two cases diagnosed with frontotemporal lobar degeneration. We evaluated 50 normal participants (41 females and 9 males) aged between 20-63 years, with schooling level of 14-20 years. In addition, two individuals diagnosed with frontotemporal lobar degeneration were examined, one with behavioral-variant frontotemporal dementia and the other with semantic dementia. On the two tests, no effects of age, gender and schooling on the performance of normal individuals were observed. According to the performance of the sample of controls, scores below 46 points on the PPT and below 47 on the KDT are suggestive of deficits in semantic memory. The analyses of both cases indicated double dissociation in establishing associations between nouns and action verbs. Although the two patients had low scores on both tests, the patient with behavioral-variant frontotemporal dementia performed better on the PPT compared to the KDT, while the patient with semantic dementia showed the reverse, performing better on the KDT. The PPT and KDT are suitable tests for use in the Brazilian population, with minimal need for adjustments. They are applicable tools both for cognitive assessment and research in semantic memory. In the present study, we obtained representative values of performance for cognitively unimpaired individuals and demonstrated the utility of these instruments for cognitive assessment of patients with FTLD.
30043826 to identify factors associated with dysphagia in patients undergoing prolonged orotracheal intubation (pOTI) and the post-extubation consequences. 150 patients undergoing pOTI participated in the study, evaluated according to the deglutition functional level (American Speech Language - Hearing Association National Outcome Measurement System - ASHA NOMS), severity determination (The Simplified Acute Physiology Score - SOFA) and submitted to collection of variables age, mortality, days of orotracheal intubation, number of sessions to introduce oral diet, and days to hospital discharge. We grouped patients according to ASHA classification: 1 (levels 1 and 2), 2 (levels 3, 4 and 5) and 3 (levels 6 and 7). the variables associated with impaired deglutition functionality were age (p<0.001), mortality (p<0.003), OTI days (p=0.001), number of sessions to introduce oral diet (p<0.001) and days to hospital discharge (p=0.018). Multiple comparisons indicated significant difference between ASHA1 and ASHA2 groups in relation to ASHA3 group. ASHA1 and ASHA2 groups had a lower SOFA score when compared with the ASHA3 group (p=0.004). Only 20% of ASHA1 patients and 32% of ASHA2 patients presented safe deglutition levels before discharge. factors associated with dysphagia in patients submitted to pOTI were age over 55 years and orotracheal intubation time (greater in the cases with worse deglutition functionality). The post-extubation consequences were increased mortality and length of hospital stay in the presence of dysphagia.
30043827 To investigate the facilitators and barriers involved in the use of Augmentative and Alternative Communication (AAC) by people with complex communication needs in social and therapeutic environments under family members/caregivers and speech-language pathologists (SLP) perceptions. This is a transversal quantitative and qualitative study with 20 family members/caregivers (FCG) and 20 SLP (SLPG). The data was collected by semistructured interviews with specific questionnaires for each group; recorded and transcribed for further analysis. Data was categorized in thematic axes, categories and subcategories, using recurrent and salient criteria. The two most important topics were: barriers and facilitators. Both groups indicate as barriers: high material cost, using other ways to communicate, family member as interpreter, language and cognitive deficits, acceptance of AAC for users and family members, lack of comprehension of AAC and family perceptions of AAC as speech suppress. As facilitators, both groups indicate the use of high technology, versatility and availability of AAC systems, family adherence and engagement, contextualized use of AAC outside of therapeutic contexts and the importance of therapeutic setting and team support. In this way, the main interlocutors in AAC implementation, professionals or family members can be barriers when they make it difficult for users to exercise their autonomy in communication, or facilitators when they encourage and use AAC with users.
30043829 Investigate the performance of native speakers of Brazilian Portuguese in the Test of Narrative Language (TNL) and correlate their performance in its oral narration and narrative comprehension subtests. Participants were 140 individuals with typical language development aged 5-0 to 11-11 (years-months) divided according to age group. Statistically significant difference was observed between the 5-year-old group and all the other age groups and between the 6-year-old group and the 8-, 9-, 10- and 11-year-old groups. The 7-year-old group did not differ from the 6- and 8-year-old groups. Half of the 7-year-old group was in 1st grade of Elementary School and the other half was in 2nd grade, which may have contributed to the non-differentiation between this group and its border-age groups. No statistically significant difference was found between groups as of the age of eight years. Positive correlation was observed between performance in the narrative comprehension and oral narration subtests of the TNL in the 5-, 6- and 7-year-old groups, which did not occur for the other age groups. The Test of Narrative Language differentiated the 5-, 6- and 7-year-old groups, but did not differentiate groups as of the age of eight years. No correlation was found between performance in the oral narration and narrative comprehension subtests of the TNL as of the age of eight years, which suggests mastery of both skills from this age.
30043842 The study aimed to identify information sources for decision-making and barriers to access in the use of scientific journals by Municipal Health Secretaries in the State of Paraná, Brazil. Study participants included Secretaries of Health from 181 municipalities in the year 2014. Interviews focused on the frequency of consultation of resources for obtaining evidence, including from scientific journals. 40.9% of the participants were 18 to 39 years of age (mean age was 43±10.2 years; median 42 years). More than two-thirds (69.1%) had held the office of health secretary for less than five years. The majority were males (56.4%), and only one in three had a graduate degree in public health. The main sources of information were 'non-scientific periodicals' (76.2%), 'print/online journals' (71.4%), and 'Ministry of Health guidelines' (71.3%). The main barriers to use of scientific journals were 'lack of time for reading' (72.9%), 'periodical's high cost' (69.1%), and 'difficulty in identifying the best periodicals' (63.5%). The main information sources were non-scientific periodicals and Ministry of Health guidelines. The use of scientific journals is hindered by lack of time and limited familiarity with scientific language. Access to scientific information should be facilitated by the use of more accessible sources and training for municipal administrators in the use of open-access periodicals. Such measures can foster knowledge of current evidence among municipal health secretaries.
30043844 This article discusses the configuration of specialized healthcare networks and aims to analyze the potential for optimization of geographic access in the chemotherapy network of the Brazilian Unified National Health System (SUS) in Rio Grande do Sul State, Brazil, using linear programming. The study used ex post facto mathematical modeling with an analytical objective and a qualitative-quantitative approach, using data collection and literature and document searches as the procedures. The potential for optimization was assessed by the percentage difference between the total distances traveled under the current situation and the optimum solution obtained. The results with the optimized situation included a decrease of 293,246km (14.4%) in the total monthly distance traveled in the network, or a mean reduction of 13.02km per procedure performed, compared to the current distance traveled. This gain would be obtained by redistribution of the municipalities of origin and the referral services' capacity to supply procedures. The results point to great potential for optimization of the target network, proving that linear programming can provide technical support for the configuration of new specialized thematic healthcare networks and optimization of the existing networks.
30043845 The authors analyze the relations between two subareas of Collective Health - Planning and Evaluation - through a bibliometric study of articles, theses, and dissertations published from 1980 to 2016. The overall production on Evaluation exceeds that of Planning, particularly since the 2000s. The capacity to influence health sector administration appears to drive the dispute between the two subareas. Both have theoretical and methodological resources to overcome their reductions under the instrumental logic of so-called managerialism, as well as to consolidate themselves as devices for reflection and change.
30043846 This study aimed to identify the treatment itineraries of Brazilian women with severe maternal morbidity. This was a qualitative, descriptive, exploratory study in a university referral hospital for high-risk pregnancy in the interior of São Paulo State, Brazil. The sample included 16 women with severe complications during pregnancy, childbirth, or postpartum. Data were collected with semi-structured, taped, transcribed interviews subsequently submitted to Content Analysis. The results showed that at the onset of illness, the women take various paths to reach low and high-complexity services, while also relying on neighbor women, pharmacies, and self-medication. They encounter obstacles in the services' receptiveness, continuity of care, case-resolution capacity, and referrals within the healthcare network. Critical points were observed in obstetric care: women are frequently subjected to trekking from one health service to another to obtain care, delays in referrals, and institutional violence. The tertiary hospital was described as receptive and effective. The study identified problems in the entire chain of obstetric care, helping explain how the healthcare system is organized to deal with severe maternal complications.
30043847 The study aimed to investigate inequalities in the commitment of family income to private expenditures on dental care in Brazil. Data were analyzed from 55,970 Brazilian households that participated in the nationwide Family Budgets Survey in 2008-2009. The commitment of family income to private spending on dental care was calculated by dividing the mean annual per capita household spending on dental care by the mean annual per capita income, classified in four categories: > 0%, ≥ 5%, ≥ 10%, and ≥ 20%. Analysis of income commitment only included households with positive spending. Only 2,961 households (7%) reported positive spending on dental care. Mean annual per capita spending was BRL 42.19 (USD 12.78) overall and BRL 602.47 (USD 182.57) among those with positive spending. Households with the highest absolute expenditures on dental care were those from urban areas and the wealthiest quintile. Meanwhile, households with the highest proportional income commitment were from rural areas and the poorest quintile. Among those that reported positive spending, 55% of the households in the poorest quintile committed ≥ 20% of their income to dental care. The proportion was only 6% in the wealthiest quintile of the population. The poorest households in the wealthiest regions of Brazil (Central, South, and Southeast) showed the highest income commitments. There were striking socioeconomic inequalities in spending and income commitment to dental care. The evaluation of these inequalities is relevant for the evaluation and orientation of public health policies.
30043849 Today's intensification of labor is part of the industrial transformations under way in Brazil since the 1990s, involving changes in the social production of auto workers' strain and epidemiological profile. Accident- and disease-related absenteeism is an important indicator of auto workers' strain, with relevance to the health field. The study aims to analyze the intensification of labor and its health implications from the perspective of the health-disease process, based on workers' perceptions at an automobile assembly plant in the ABC Industrial Belt of São Paulo. Workers were asked about the obstacles to returning to work following work-related accidents or diseases (commonly referred to as 'compatible' workers). We conducted six visits to the plant and 20 interviews with assembly line workers. Data were collected from March 2010 to November 2014. The results depict the social figure of the 'compatible' worker, a 'compound fracture' in the production process, expressed as the intensification of labor, characterized by an intense work pace, denser work, extended workdays, and heavy stress, while simultaneously pointing to a trend toward laying off 'compatible' workers. The study contributes to the search for knowledge on the intensification of labor and its health implications. We hope to have produced backing for further research on determination of the health-disease process, based on the incorporation of workers' experience.
30043850 This study aimed to assess the program for use of the monoclonal antibody palivizumab in São Paulo State, Brazil. The evaluation adopted the frame of reference proposed by Donabedian, and the data were discussed on the basis of the guidelines from the Ruling on the use of palivizumab in the national network and in the Manual on Standards and Procedures for Vaccination. Sixteen application services in the state were included, with 693 children/mothers enrolled in the program in 2014 (85.1% of the eligible population). For the structure and process evaluation, scores were created that allowed classifying the application services as adequate, partially adequate, and inadequate (non-compliance rates were ≤ 10%, 11-20%, and > 20%, respectively). Results were evaluated according to the association between failure to administer palivizumab and need for hospitalization due to respiratory disease/symptoms, based on the point and interval odds ratios, with 95% confidence interval and critical p-value < 0.05. Of the 11 application services whose structure was classified as adequate, only two showed adequate process, four showed inadequate process, and five partially adequate process. Risk of ICU admission due to respiratory disease/symptoms increased on average by 30% for each failure (p = 0.003; OR = 1.30; 95%CI: 1.09-1.55). In conclusion, having a favorable structure for the program for use of palivizumab in São Paulo State did not necessarily result in an adequate process. In general, the situation with the structure was better than the process. All doses of the monoclonal antibody need to be administered in order to prevent hospitalization from respiratory disease/symptoms.
30043853 Pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) has been considered a promising strategy for controlling the global HIV epidemic. However, it is necessary to translate the knowledge accumulated from clinical trials and demosntration studies to the reality of health services and the groups most vulnerable to infection in order to achieve broad coverage with PrEP. The article proposes a reflection on this challenge, focusing on three dimensions: users of prophylaxis, with an emphasis on the contexts of sexual practices and the potential exposures to HIV; the advantages of prophylaxis as compared to other methods and the challenges for protective and safe use; and health services, considering the organizational principles to ensure greater success in the supply and incorporation of PrEP as part of combination prevention strategies. The following principles were analyzed: uniqueness of care, freedom of choice and non-hierarchization of prevention methods, sexual risk management, scheduling flexibility, and complementary and multidisciplinary care. These principles can foster organization of the health service and care, facilitating linkage and retention in care. Some comments were offered on the relative incompatibility between the existing structure of services and the Brazilian Ministry of Health guidelines for offering PrEP. The conclusion was that the success of PrEP as a public health policy depends on two essential factors: ensuring that health services are culturally diverse settings, free of discrimination, and the intensification of community-based interventions, including social networks, in order to reduce inequalities in access to PrEP and health services as a whole.
30043898 Prepare an instrument to evaluate reading comprehension and verify the influence of receptive vocabulary on the reading comprehension of 3rd to 5th-grade Elementary School students with typical development. All ethical precepts were accomplished. Study participants were 69 3rd-, 4th- and 5th-grade students (35 girls) with mean ages of 8.2, 9.2, and 10 years, respectively, with typical development in the School Performance Test. Half of the sample underwent the reading comprehension test using the question-and-answer method and the other half took the test using the Cloze technique. All students completed the Teste de Vocabulário por Figuras USP (TVFUSP) with 139 stimuli. The schoolchildren presented good performance in receptive vocabulary despite their low socioeconomic level. Better performance was observed in explicit questions compared with that in implicit questions. Students demonstrated more homogeneous and similar performance between the school years in the Cloze technique. No conclusive results were found regarding the correlation between receptive vocabulary and reading comprehension by the two methods. There is evidence of the influence of receptive vocabulary on the reading comprehension of texts, mainly in the question-and-answer method. The prepared instrument, including both assessment methods of reading comprehension, is efficient to investigate and characterize the reading comprehension of 3rd to 5th-grade Elementary School students, and both methods significantly differentiated students in the 3rd and 5th grades.
30043899 To investigate the auditory perception of lay judges of the voice gender identification of women with Reinke's edema and to associate it with its severity and fundamental frequency (F0). This is an observational, analytical and cross-sectional study. A total of 46 lay judges analyzed 48 samples (counting numbers 1 to 10) of 24 women with Reinke's edema - the Reinke's Edema Group (REG) and 24 individuals, men and women, with other types of voice disorders - Control Group (CG). The judges had to classify the voices as being of a man or a woman. Additionally, they needed to indicate their certainty or not about their choice. Results were associated with the severity of the Reinke's edema (Type 1, 2 or 3) and the F0 (extracted from the vowel /Ɛ/). Misidentification of gender was higher in the REG and certainty about the choice was higher in the CG. Type 1 cases caused fewer misidentifications compared to type 2 and 3. The women's voices that were identified as male voices had a lower F0 (141Hz) when compared to voices that were correctly identified (149Hz). Women with Reinke's edema are frequently identified as men. Lower F0 was related with more misidentification and less certainty when assessing the speaker's gender.
30043900 to report a series of cases of robotic bariatric surgery in the treatment of obesity in Brazil. we evaluated patients undergoing robotic bariatric surgery at the Garrido Institute and compared them with a group submitted to conventional laparoscopic surgery. we analyzed 45 patients, with a mean age of 39.44 years, of which 34 were female, with an initial mean BMI of 41.26kg/m2. Among the procedures performed, 91.11% were Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, while 8.89% were sleeve gastrectomy. The mean total surgery time was 158 (±56.54) minutes, with mean docking time of 7.93 (±3.9) minutes, and console time 113.0 (±41.4) minutes. The average pain presented in the post anesthetic recovery was 2.61 (±3.30) points on a scale of 0 to 10; four patients presented with mild signs of nausea, responding well to drug treatment. Only one patient needed ICU admission for a period of two days after surgery due to previous cardiopathy. In two cases, there was an incisional hernia at the trocar site, which were surgically treated without further complications. In the comparison between robotic versus laparoscopic surgery groups, 45 patients were selected for each group. Operative time was significantly longer in the robotic surgery group, with most other variables being equivalent, including postoperative control of comorbidities. robotic bariatric surgery is a safe procedure, with results comparable to laparoscopic surgery.
30043901 to assess the physicians' knowledge regarding intra-abdominal hypertension and abdominal compartment syndrome and to compare it with the established literature. we conducted a descriptive, observational, cross-sectional, quantitative study. We interviewed 38 physicians through a self-administered questionnaire composed of objective questions. We carried out the study in a tertiary reference university hospital, located in Curitiba, Paraná. the mean age of the participants was 28 years, 60.5% were female and the mean time of medical experience was 3.5 years. Regarding the knowledge on the subject, 57.9% considered that abdominal compartment syndrome starts with intra-abdominal grade III hypertension, 50% considered abdominal perfusion pressure the most reliable method to determine intra-abdominal hypertension, 89.4% considered the intravesical measuring technique as the most used, 71.1% considered oliguria to be the early sign of abdominal compartment syndrome. Of the interviewees, 81.6% did not measure intra-abdominal pressure because there was no protocol defined by the service. Seventy-nine percent of respondents said they did not know the definitions of the consensus of the World Society of the Abdominal Compartment Syndrome (WSACS). half of the physicians were able to classify intra-abdominal hypertension and indicate the onset of abdominal compartment syndrome correctly.
30043928 To assess the effectiveness of telephone educational interventions on the duration and exclusiveness of breastfeeding. A systematic review of the literature was conducted including only Randomized Clinical Trials. The exposure factor was an educational intervention via telephone, and the outcomes were duration and exclusiveness of breastfeeding. Literature in Portuguese, English and Spanish published between 2010 and 2016 were searched for in the Cochrane, Lilacs, Medline and Scopus databases. The articles were analyzed through a results synthesis. 241 articles were identified, of which 231 did not meet the inclusion criteria. Therefore, only 10 articles were reviewed. Four studies showed no efficacy related to breastfeeding. Regarding common characteristics, these studies were performed in short periods and in pairs. The others revealed efficacy regarding duration and/or exclusiveness of breastfeeding. The latter were mostly studies with long-term interventions and carried out by nurse lactation consultants. The evidence demonstrates that the telephone is a viable technology for promoting breastfeeding, representing an alternative for the health units and health professionals that can contribute to mother-baby care.
30043929 To describe the construction process of an intervention in the form of a Nursing Care program to Adolescents aimed at preventing and controlling overweight/obesity in the school environment. A methodological study developed through Intervention Mapping in Natal/RN, Brazil, between October of 2015 and September of 2016, with the participation of adolescents, public school teachers and nurses in Primary Health Care. Data sources were focus groups, interviews and an integrative review. The Collective Subject Discourse was used for analysis. At the end of the six stages of the Intervention Mapping, the 'School Health Nursing Program' (Programa de Enfermagem Saúde na Escola) was constructed, which should be implemented over 10 months with five weekly classes of exercises and a weekly session of nursing interventions detailed in the Program. The nursing intervention guided by Intervention Mapping allows actions based on theories, community participation, school/service bonds, and care continuity.
30043930 To describe and interpret the experience of breastfeeding among women who underwent mammoplasty surgery prior to motherhood. A descriptive, qualitative study developed with women attended at a Human Milk Bank between 2014 and 2015. Data analysis was based on the content analysis method and supported by the Interactive Theory of Breastfeeding. 13 women participated in the study. Four categories emerged: 1) Success (or lack thereof) in Exclusive Breastfeeding: influence of maternal and child biological conditions; 2) Maternal feelings: perception about breastfeeding; 3) Decision making on the continuity of breastfeeding or the use of formula; 4) The role of health professionals in protecting, promoting and supporting breastfeeding: Information (or lack thereof) on the implications of the surgery. Unfavorable biological conditions of the women who underwent mammoplasty generated unsuccessful experiences in exclusive breastfeeding and limited their decision-making, despite their desire to breastfeed.
30043931 The 'Brave New World' envisioned a society dominated by scientific and technological progress that went as far as to subjugate and dehumanize human beings. The future foreseen in this literary work is not far from what we are currently experiencing. Thus, considering that Nursing is affected and challenged in the midst of these technological transformations, this article aims to discuss the present and future of Nursing in a society that is undergoing constant technological transformations. In the midst of a whole technological apparatus in which fundamental procedures begin to be carried out by machines, Nursing needs to begin reflecting on what would be the best posture or its differential in a world with strong technological tendencies. Future transformations are still uncertain, nonetheless they will drastically change the way individuals relate to one another and to health services. Even in the midst of these uncertainties arising from present and future technological and scientific advances, the nature of Nursing which is essentially based on human interactions, can guarantee a place of prominence for this profession in society.
30043941 To analyze the association between the occurrence of pruritus and adherence to the prescribed diet, biochemical indicators of renal function and the quality of hemodialysis in chronic renal patients. A cross-sectional study performed at a dialysis clinic in the Northeast of Brazil, with 200 patients undergoing hemodialysis in the first half of 2015.To analyze the data, inferential statistics were used, using Chi-Square and Fisher's Exact tests; and Mann Whitney U test. The pruritus was present in 51% of the sample, being associated statistically with phosphorus consumption (P = 0.024) and elevation of serum calcium (P = 0.009). Pruritus in chronic renal patients undergoing hemodialysis is influenced by adequate nonadherence to the prescribed diet, in addition to the elevation of biochemical indicators of renal function.
30043942 To describe the epidemiological characteristics of perinatal deaths through the actions of the Unified Health System. This is a descriptive study of temporal analysis with a population of perinatal deaths of mothers residing in Recife, Brazil, from 2010 to 2014. A list was used to classify the preventable diseases and the variables were analysed using Epi lnfo™ version 7. The perinatal deaths totalled 1,756 (1,019 foetal and 737 neonatal premature) with a reduction of neonatal deaths (-15.8%) and an increase of foetal deaths (12.1%) in the study period. The main causes of death were foetus and newborn affected by the mother´s condition and asphyxia/hypoxia at birth. Most deaths were avoidable, especially in the group of appropriate care to mothers during pregnancy. Faults in the care provided to women at birth explain the percentage of deaths caused by asphyxia/hypoxia. The reduction of preventable perinatal mortality is associated with the increased access and quality of care, which ensures health promotion, disease prevention, treatment and specific and timely care.
30043943 To identify theoretical frameworks and instruments for the evaluation of critical thinking to base studies in nursing and education. Integrative review, with a selection of scientific articles in Portuguese, English and Spanish, in the LILACS, SCIELO, IBECS, MEDLINE/PubMed and SCOPUS databases, using the descriptors 'thought', 'teaching' and 'nursing' in Portuguese and English. The search resulted in 3,147 articles, and 23 papers published between 2010 and 2015 were selected. Fourteen (60.2%) studies used the Facione framework and eight (34.4%) resorted to different critical thinking assessment tools applied in nursing and education. Most studies used the Facione framework. Among the evaluation tools, the California Critical Thinking Skills Test (CCTST) and the Watson-Glaser Critical Thinking Appraisal stood out as the most common instruments; both focus on cognitive skills in critical thinking.
30043944 To identify scientific literature on oncology nurses who provide patient navigation services as nurse navigators. Integrative review of literature searches in the databases LILACS, MEDLINE/PubMed, SCOPUS, SciELO, Web of Science and Science Direct based on the descriptors patient; navigation; nurse; professional; cancer; oncology; navigator; and navigators. Seventeen articles were identified and grouped according to the following thematic approach: Care Processes; Patients; and Health Workers. It was observed that scientific literature on nurse navigators mostly comes from the United States, Australia, Canada, Sweden, and Demark, where the first nurse navigator programmes were introduced. No studies were found in local journals or populations. The nurse navigator offer a unique service for the provision of quality care. Although international research is recent, further studies on the role of these professionals are clearly needed.
30043945 To verify the adequacy of the roles and functions performed by higher education professionals in the services of psychosocial care network in a Northeastern Brazilian capital. Cross-sectional, analytical study of quantitative approach. The sample was composed of 65 professionals from seven services of psychosocial care network in Natal, Rio Grande do Norte, Brazil. A questionnaire with closed and semi-open questions was used. The data were analyzed using SPSS version 20.0, with the chi-square test and the Fisher's exact test application. A significance level of 5 % (p<0,05) was adopted. Inadequacy regarding the care of family groups (52.3%), specialist training in mental health (69.2%, p=0.02), and working difficulties in services (87.7%) were detected. The roles and functions carried out by professionals in the services surveyed are adequate, although coexisting with numerous difficulties.
30043946 To analyze the conceptions of the nursing professionals working in Basic Health Units regarding the detection and prevention of violence against the elderly. Descriptive, exploratory, qualitative study. Performed in two BHUs in Mossoró/RN, using a semi-structured interview script, from March to August of 2013. Sample composed of four nurses and six nursing technicians. The content analysis, pre-analysis, material exploration, and treatment of results were performed. Four categories were identified: Strategies used to identify violence against the elderly; Types of violence against the elderly; Conduct used after finding a suspicion of violence; SUS and the problem of violence against the elderly. Many professionals recognize/distrust possible cases, however, they do not know how to proceed. The dimension of the problem requires that pragmatic interventions be performed in the clinical setting and in the social context. There is a need for continuing education for professionals and greater communication between the bodies responsible for reporting and embracement.
30043947 To analyse the structure and contents of the social representations of nurses concerning domestic violence against women. This is a qualitative study conducted with 100 nurses between May and September 2014 in two hospitals of Rio Grande, RS, Brazil. Data were collected through evocations and semi-structured interviews. The data were processed in Evoc software and subjected to contextual analysis, respectively. A negative representation was identified with core elements alluding to forms of violence and its judgment, expressed as 'physical aggression' and 'contempt'. In the periphery, 'fear' is how the professionals and the victims feel toward the aggressor and 'submission' is mentioned as a cause of violence. The term 'verbal aggression' in the contrast zone suggests the possibility of a subgroup with a different representation. A centralised view regarding physical injuries and the culpabilisation of domestic abuse victims can limit care actions, revealing the need to discuss this subject with health workers.
30043948 To analyze the understanding of municipal managers of health about public policies destined to the elderly population and the way they are effected in the city. Qualitative study, developed with 14 municipal managers of health. Data were collected through a semi-structured interview and analyzed according the precepts of content analysis. The results show the lack of knowledge of the municipal health managers, related to public policies of attention to the elderly. Also, the attention given to the elderly in the studied municipalities focuses on measures to control health problems. The municipalities do not have specific health care policies for the elderly population. Thus, these results can support reflections about care for the elderly in health services, their relationship with legislation, and the applicability of public health policies.
30043949 To identify and compare the structure and content of representations of domestic violence against women among students in the initial and final grades of a nursing undergraduate course. A qualitative study was carried out between August/November 2014, in Rio Grande/RS, with 132 nursing students, 71 of the initial grades and 61 of the final grades. The data has been collected through evocations and interviews; for the treatment, the EVOC software and content analysis have been used. Approval under Opinion 109/2014. In common in the central nucleus are the terms violence, cowardice, disrespect and pain. The first group evoked sadness and the second, physical violence. The representation has negative connotations, with discrete differentiation. The students of the final series are based on the reified knowledge and have the structured representation, with concept, image and attitude. It is hoped that the students will contribute to the prevention, identification and intervention of victims of violence.
30043950 To build qualitative outcome indicators in psychosocial care regarding autonomy from the perspective of users and their families. This is an evaluative case study based on the dialectical hermeneutics theoretical framework, conducted at a mental health community service, in the state of Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil. The first stage of data collection occurred between February and July 2014, and consisted of constructing indicators based on qualitative data analysis of the two evaluative studies conducted at this same service. The second stage, between August and September 2014, consisted of validating the indicators constructed through the focus groups with nine users and nine family members. The users and relatives stated three qualitative indicators related to their autonomy resulting from their insertion in the service. The indicators were better self-management of income, improved everyday activities, and greater bargaining power. The methodology proved appropriate to create qualitative indicators, from the perspective of the participants, and revealed that the service helps users achieve autonomy.
30043951 To evaluate the occupational stress among health workers in a university hospital. Cross-sectional study conducted with health workers in the areas of nursing and medicine at a university hospital in southern Brazil. The data were collected between August of 2011 and August of 2012 by a questionnaire of characterization and Job Stress Scale. A descriptive and univariate analysis was performed (Kruskal-Wallis). The participants presented high demand and high control of the work and low social support, indicating an active work. Nurses had less control over work (p<0.001) and physicians received more social support (p=0.006). Reduced social support was related to greater exposure to stress among nursing assistants and technicians (p=0.012). Workers who felt the low social support had higher exposure to stress. It is necessary to implement stress prevention strategies among health workers, such as the strengthening of social support at work.
30043952 To develop a conceptual framework that explains how elderly people from different cultures experience aging, formulate concepts and assign values to the process of aging. Qualitative research conducted with 33 elderly people in a municipality of the triple border. The data were collected between February and August of 2011, using Symbolic Interactionism and the Grounded Theory as the theoretical and methodological strategy. The central theme identified was: 'Having to age: sociocultural practices guiding aging in different ethnicities', which was made up of sub processes that characterize the study's structural concepts: aging conceived as multifactorial (physical, biopsychic and sociocultural); Experiencing aging in the process of cultural adaptation; Experiencing aging as the continuation of life; Redefining social roles; and The culture influencing habits and customs in healthcare. The experience of aging proved to be a unique process for each individual and the values assigned to it are influenced by one's own culture.
30056460 The aim of this study was to assess history of orthodontic treatment and its determinants in adolescents. This was a crosssectional study conducted in the city of Passo Fundo, Brazil, on a representative sample of adolescents aged 15 to 19 years, regularly enrolled in 20 high schools. A structured questionnaire was applied to assess demographic, behavioral and health variables. The association between history of orthodontic treatment and the dependent variables was analyzed by the chi-square test or Fisher's exact test. Additionally, multivariate regression with robust variance was performed. A total 736 students were examined and interviewed, of whom 57. 6% had undergone orthodontic treatment, while 42. 4% had not. In the multivariable analysis, the following variables were significantly associated with history of orthodontic treatment: female (PR= 1. 26; 95% CI: 1. 11-1. 43), white (PR= 1. 32; 95% CI: 1. 11-1. 56), mothers with higher level of education (PR=1. 49; 95% CI: 1. 28 -1. 74), tooth loss (PR=1. 21; 95% CI: 1. 06-1. 39), and concern about oral health (PR=0. 69; 95% CI: 0. 61-0. 78). Attending a private school was not significantly associated with history of orthodontic treatment (p>0. 05). This study found a high rate for history of orthodontic treatment among adolescents, associated with gender, ethnicity, adolescent's mother with higher education, and tooth loss. Concern about oral health was a protective factor for orthodontic treatment.
30056461 The aim of this study was to evaluate the cytotoxic effects of 2. 5% sodium hypochlorite (NaOCl), 17% ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA), and 1% peracetic acid (PAA) on human fibroblasts. FG11 and FG15 cell lines were cultured in 24-well cell culture plates for cell proliferation assessment and 96-well cell culture plates for the methylthiazolyldiphenyl-tetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay; Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) was used as control data. The experimental solutions were used at 0. 01%, 0. 05%, and 0. 1% dilutions and assessed at 1-, 2-, and 4-hour intervals. Data were subjected to statistical analysis by two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), followed by the Bonferroni test at a significance level of p <0. 05. The assessment of cell proliferation in this study showed cytotoxicity to the fibroblasts with 2. 5% NaOCl for all three dilutions at all time intervals, 17% EDTA for the 0. 05% and 0. 1% dilutions at the 2- and 4-hour intervals, and 1% PAA for all three dilutions at the 4-hour interval. The cell viability assay (MTT assay) for fibroblasts showed 2. 5% NaOCl to be cytotoxic at the 0. 05% and 0. 1% dilutions at all time intervals, 17% EDTA to be cytotoxic at the 0. 1% dilution at the 2- and 4-hour intervals, and 1% PAA to be cytotoxic at the 0. 1% dilution at the 2- and 4-hour intervals. In conclusion, 1% PAA was less cytotoxic than 2. 5% NaOCl and 17% EDTA.
30056462 The aim of the present study was to identify the relationship among instruments used to screen and diagnose temporomandibular disorders (TMD). A retrospective study was conducted using medical records of patients with temporomandibular disorder who had visited the institution for initial assessment between January and December 2015. Medical history and physical examination data were collected, particularly those focusing on the diagnosis of TMD and TMJ (temporomandibular joint) function. The following instruments were used to assess the severity of the TMD signs and symptoms: the Fonseca Anamnestic index (FAI), the Helkimo index (HI), the American Association of Orofacial Pain Questionnaire (AAOPQ) and the Jaw Symptom & Oral Habit Questionnaire (JSOHQ). Thirty-eight patient records were included, with prevalence of women (84. 6%) and mean age 37. 42 ± 14. 32 years. The patients who were classified as having severe TMD by the FAI exhibited more positive responses on the AAOPQ (6. 25 ±1. 42; one-way ANOVA F= 15. 82), with a statistically significant difference when compared to patients with mild TMD (3. 0 ±1. 22; p<0. 01). A positive correlation (r=0. 78; p<0. 01) was found between the number of positive responses on the AAOPQ and the sum of the JSOHQ scores. Patients who were classified with severe TMD on the FAI exhibited higher scores on the JSOHO (18. 58 ±4. 96/oneway ANOVA F=14. 43), with a statistically significant difference when compared to patients with moderate (12. 08 ±5. 64; p<0. 01) and mild TMD (7. 46 ±4. 89; p<0. 01). In the study sample, there was consistency among the instruments used to differentiate patients with severe and mild TMD. The selection of instruments should be rational, in order to improve the quality of the results.
30064145 To assess the relationship between the use of psychoactive substances during pregnancy and the occurrence of severe maternal morbidity (SMM), perinatal outcomes and repercussions on the neuropsychomotor development of exposed children.  A case-control study nested within a cohort of severe maternal morbidity (COMMAG) was performed. Women with SMM were considered cases. Controls were those with low-risk pregnancy, without SMM and admitted during the same time period as the cases. Cohort data were collected retrospectively in hospital records for childbirth. A face-to-face interview was also performed with 638 women (323 without SMM and 315 with SMM) and their children of the index pregnancy between 6 months and 5 years after childbirth. During the interview, substance abuse during pregnancy was assessed by a modified question from the Alcohol, Smoking and Substance Involvement Screening Test 2.0 (ASSIST) and the neuropsychomotor development in the children was assessed by the Denver Developmental Screening Test, 2<sup>nd</sup> edition.  The prevalence of licit or illicit drug use during pregnancy was ∼ 17%. Among drug users, 63.9% used alcohol, 58.3% used tobacco, 9.2% used cocaine/crack and 4.6% used marijuana. There was no association between drug use during pregnancy and SMM, although tobacco use during pregnancy was associated with bleeding, presence of near-miss clinical criteria (NMCC) and alteration in infant development; alcohol use was associated with neonatal asphyxia; and cocaine/crack use was associated with the occurrence of some clinical complications during pregnancy.  The use of psychoactive substances during pregnancy is frequent and associated with worse maternal, perinatal and child development outcomes.
30066724 Evaluate high-frequency auditory thresholds, seeking to compare responses between the ears, to verify the correlation between hearing level and aging and analyze frequency responses in normal hearing adults. This is a prospective, quantitative, transversal study conducted with a convenience sample. Study participants were 60 individuals aged 18 to 58 years (mean=25.82) with auditory thresholds within normality standards (250-8000 Hz) and normal results in acoustic immittance measurements. High-frequency pure-tone hearing thresholds were determined using an Interacoustics AS10HF audiometer with electrodynamic high-fidelity KOSS R/80 headphones, with thresholds expressed in dBNPS. Hearing thresholds showed an increase for the right ear with statistical significance at the 10, 11 and 14 kHz frequencies and a tendency to significance at 13 kHz. As of the 14 kHz frequency, a progressive increase directly proportional to the frequency was observed bilaterally, with the thresholds increasing proportionally to age advancement for all frequencies. High-frequency auditory thresholds progressively increase proportionally to frequency and age advancement in normal hearing individuals, with higher values ​​for the right ear.
30066731 ANDROMEDA-SHOCK is an international, multicenter, randomized controlled trial comparing peripheral perfusion-targeted resuscitation to lactate-targeted resuscitation in patients with septic shock in order to test the hypothesis that resuscitation targeting peripheral perfusion will be associated with lower morbidity and mortality. To report the statistical analysis plan for the ANDROMEDA-SHOCK trial. We describe the trial design, primary and secondary objectives, patients, methods of randomization, interventions, outcomes, and sample size. We describe our planned statistical analysis for the primary, secondary and tertiary outcomes. We also describe the subgroup and sensitivity analyses. Finally, we provide details for presenting our results, including mock tables showing baseline characteristics, the evolution of hemodynamic and perfusion variables, and the effects of treatments on outcomes. According to the best trial practice, we report our statistical analysis plan and data management plan prior to locking the database and initiating the analyses. We anticipate that this procedure will prevent analysis bias and enhance the utility of the reported results.
30066736 to create a multidisciplinary conducts manual for tracheostomies in adult and pediatric patients in the Amazonas State Oncology Control Center Foundation. we developed a protocol using the modified Delphi method, which consisted in the application of two series of questionnaires to 20 professionals of the unit. thirteen professionals completed the two steps. In the first stage, there was consensus in 53 out of 92 questions (57.6%). The questions that obtained consensus formed the text of the second stage, divided into eight chapters and evaluated by marking the answers offered on a Linkert scale. All the chapters presented in the second stage obtained consensus, meaning that the sum of the answers 'agree' and 'fully agree' were above 70%. using the data obtained in the consensus, we elaborated a tracheostomy conduct protocol and a care guidelines manual for the patients and their caregivers.
30066737 to study the efficacy and safety of the use of subconjunctival triamcinolone acetate alone or in combination with mitomycin C as a modulator of trabeculectomy healing in rabbits. we submitted thirty male, albino, New Zealand rabbits to bilateral trabeculectomy. We divided the animals into four experimental groups with 15 eyes per group: control, mitomycin C, triamcinolone acetate and triamcinolone acetate + mitomycin C. We performed aplanation tonometry and clinical analysis of the bleb through the Moorfields Graduation System in the postoperative period. For the evaluation of healing, we carried out the quantitative analysis of the inflammatory infiltrate (polymorphonuclear) through Hematoxylin & Eosin staining, and vascular proliferation, through immunohistochemistry. we observed a significant decrease in postoperative intraocular pressure in all groups compared with the preoperative pressure (p<0.001). However, there was no difference between groups (p=0.186). The triamcinolone + mitomycin C acetate group presented better indices as for the maximum bleb height and vascularization of the bleb central area (p=0.001); in addition, there was a lower inflammatory response (p=0.001) and lower vascular proliferation (p=0.001) in the intermediate phase of the study compared with the monotherapies. the combination of mitomycin C and triamcinolone acetate resulted in a synergistic action between these agents, with broader and more diffuse blebs, less inflammatory infiltrate and less vascular proliferation in the intermediate stages of follow-up in this animal model.
30066738 Inappropriate therapy of postoperative pain in laparoscopic cholecystectomy may lead to late mobilization, patient dissatisfaction, delayed hospital discharge, and chronic pain development. Our objective was to identify the best therapeutic strategy available to the anesthesiologist for the acute postoperative pain of patients submitted to elective laparoscopic cholecystectomy. This is a systematic review that included 36 complete articles indexed in the Medline, Scopus, Web of Science and LILACS databases, with a five-year time cut (2012 to 2016), resulting from controlled and randomized studies that were submitted to qualitative analysis. In a proposal for multimodal analgesia, it is important to consider the contraindications, adverse effects, dose and optimal timing of interventions. Non-opioid drugs, such as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)/cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors, gabapentin/pregabalin, N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonists, and others. Opioids may be used at low doses associated with multimodal therapy or are restricted to cases where non-opioid multimodal analgesia is insufficient. We conclude that there is no consensus as to the best analgesic strategy to be implemented in the acute postoperative pain of laparoscopic cholecystectomy, which requires its applicability in an individualized way, based on the scientific evidence found in the literature. As contribution to medical learning and practice, we point out the theoretical enrichment of the analgesic drug options available for the therapy of postoperative pain in patients submitted to elective laparoscopic cholecystectomy, and alert the team to consider the adverse effects of the interventions implemented.
30066818 To describe a case of congenital syphilis with a late diagnosis and identify missed opportunities at diverse phases/levels of healthcare, which led to late diagnosis. Boy, 34 days of life, referred from a basic healthcare unit to a tertiary hospital due to enlarged abdominal volume and progressive jaundice for 2 weeks, fecal hypocholia, hepatosplenomegaly, anemia, low platelet count and elevated liver enzymes. At physical examination, the infant presented with erythematous-exfoliative lesions on the palms and soles, macular rash in the inguinal region, ascitis, palpable liver 5 cm below the right costal margin and a palpable spleen 3 cm from the left costal margin. Infant serology: reactive CMIA (chemiluminescent microparticle immunoassay), VDRL (Venereal Diseases Research Laboratory) 1:1024 and reactive TPHA (Treponema pallidum Hemagglutination). Maternal serology: reactive CMIA and TPHA, VDRL 1:256. Radiography of the long bones showed symmetric periostitis, periosteal thickening, and lucent bands in the femur, humerus, ulna and tibia. After treatment with crystalline penicillin, the infant showed clinical and laboratory improvement, receiving hospital discharge at the 18th hospitalization day. This case shows that congenital syphilis is occasionally diagnosed late as a result of failed strategies to prevent this disease, both in the basic and secondary/tertiary levels of care. The application of interventions recommended by the Ministry of Health and identification of the situation in which there is ineffective implementation of these measures are important to assess routine care in all levels of healthcare and diverse units responsible for newborn and infant health care.
30066819 To verify the relationship between polymorphisms of the vitamin D receptor gene (VDR), clinical findings, and serum vitamin D (VD) levels in asthmatics. A cross sectional study of 77 children aged 7 to 14 years old, who were attended at a specialized clinic. The children were divided into 3 groups: asthmatics who had been using inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) for more than one year; asthmatics who had not been using ICS; non-asthmatics, and children without allergies (according to the International Study of Asthma and Allergies in Childhood -- ISAAC). Spirometry, skin prick tests, the presence of a VDR promoter CDX2 polymorphism from an allele-specific polimerase chain reaction (PCR), exons 2 and 3 polymorphisms genotyping by PCR-SSCA (single-strand conformational analysis), total immunoglobulin E (IgE) and specific IgE to mites and grass were evaluated in these three groups. Levels of 25-hydroxyvitamin D were determined in asthmatics only. The mean age of the children was 10.8±2.0 years old, 57% were male, 38 were asthmatic and using ICS, 22 were asthmatic and not using ICS, and 17 were non-asthmatic. Allergic rhinitis was present in 90% of asthmatics. Homozygous CDX2 was detected in 23% of the patients and absent in the control group (p=0.03). Lower forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1%) values were observed in CDX2 homozygous asthmatics (p=0.001). Variations in the exon 2 and 3 sequences were not related to asthma or the other tests. VD deficiency or insufficiency was detected in 98% of asthmatics. There was no association between VD levels and genetic polymorphisms from exons 2 and 3. There was a positive association between homozygous CDX2 polymorphism, asthma and lower FEV1% values. CDX2 is capable of modifying cell interaction between VDR and VD, and it could be associated with the prevalence of asthma, and the difficulty in controlling the disease.
30066820 To examine the profile and appropriate use of antibiotics among hospitalized children. A cross-sectional study was conducted with children who had taken antibiotics during hospitalization in a private philanthropic hospital in Southern Brazil, from January to December 2015. The data were obtained by reviewing medical records, encompassing demographic data (age, gender, ethnicity, and body weight) and clinical data (causes of hospitalization, use of antibiotics, and clinical outcome). Descriptive statistics was used to present the data. Of the 318 participants included in the study, 61.3% were male patients. The age range varied between 2 and 11 years, with mean age of 5.8±2.9 years. The prevalence of antibiotics was 24.4% out of the 1,346 hospitalized children. Median hospital stay was four days. The main cause of hospitalization was clinical instability, and the most commonly prescribed antibiotics was Cefazolin, mostly administered intravenously. Regarding the administration of antibiotics, 62.2% were adequately prescribed, even though underdose was 11.7%, and overdose was 14.6% in the studied patients. Antibiotic administration intervals were characterized as long in 8% of cases, and short in 3.5% of cases. Although the prevalence of antibiotics among hospitalized children was not that high, a considerable part of the sample presented inadequacy regarding the dosage and range of use. These data raise concerns about bacterial resistance and adverse reactions.
30066821 To assess the association between traumatic fractures and glucocorticoids taken 12 months prior to a trauma, in children and adolescents seen at an emergency room. A case-control study was conducted from April to October 2015, at a pediatric emergency hospital with patients aged 3- to 14 years-old, who had suffered physical trauma. Some of the patients had a fracture and some did not. The data analyzed were obtained from medical records, physical examination of the patients, and interview with the patients' caregivers. Glucocorticoid use in the past 12 months, demographic variables, body mass index, milk intake, trauma intensity, physical activity and smoking in the household were compared between the two patient groups. A total of 104 patients with physical trauma were studied - 50 had a fracture and 54 did not. Of all the patients, 15.4% had previously used glucocorticoids, and there were no statistically significant differences between the groups. The age range of 10- to 14 years-old, severe trauma and physical activity were more prevalent among patients with a bone fracture. This study did not find an association between previous glucocorticoid use and the occurrence of fractures in children and adolescents. The age range of 10- to 14 years-old, severe trauma, and physical activity were associated with an increased risk for fractures.
30066822 To analyze clinical, laboratory and histopathological features and the path to diagnosis establishment and treatment of patients with adrenal carcinoma (AC). Retrospective study with 13 patients assisted at the pediatric oncology service of Hospital das Clínicas, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Brazil, between 2004 and 2015. Age at diagnosis ranged from 1.0 to 14.8 years (median: 2.0 years). Manifestations of hypercortisolism were identified in all cases and virilization in all girls. All patients met the Weiss criteria to AC histopathological diagnosis. Immunohistochemistry was performed in 61.5% of the cases. Most patients had stage I disease (76.9%). All subjects were submitted to total tumor resection. Two patients (stages III and IV disease) received chemotherapy associated to mitotane. The only death case was that of a patient with stage IV disease. The probability of overall survival for the entire group up to 5.0 years was 92.3±7.4%. The median time between the onset of symptoms and diagnosis was 9.5 months, and 6.0 months between first visit and start of treatment. Low age at diagnosis, predominance of cases with localized disease and complete tumor resection - with only one case of tumor capsule rupture - can possibly explain the favorable evolution of the studied population. The long period between onset of symptoms and diagnosis highlights the importance of training pediatricians for early recognition of AC signs and symptoms.
30066823 To establish waist circumference cut off points according to pubertal staging to identify overweight in adolescents. Longitudinal study approved by the Ethics Research Committee and conducted with 557 adolescents, aged 10 to 15 years old, selected from public schools. Waist, arm, neck and hip circumferences, body fat percentage, body mass index (BMI), height and blood pressure were measured. Pubertal staging was evaluated by Tanner self assessment scale. The Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve (ROC curve) was used to determine predictive power, sensitivity, specificity and waist circumference cut off points to detect overweight. There was a positive correlation between waist circumference and weight, BMI, upper arm and hip circumferences, waist-to-hip ratio and blood pressure in both sexes. Cut off points for waist circumference according to pubertal stage as related to overweight in adolescents with the best performances in ROC curve were: 71.65 cm for prepubescent girls, 67.90 cm for pubescent girls, 70.25 cm for post pubescent girls, and 66.45 cm for pubescent boys. Age, weight, height, BMI, body fat percentage, arm and hip circumferences were associated to altered waist circumference. The establishment of cut off points for waist circumference according to pubertal staging was proven a good means to identify overweight. These cut off points can be considered reliable for the Brazilian adolescent population, as the isolated use of chronological age in adolescents may underestimate their nutritional status.
30066824 To report on the case of a patient with neonatal pemphigus that had extensive and critical skin lesions at birth. A newborn male with extensive vesico-bullous lesions on the anterior side of his chest and abdomen at birth. He was admitted to the pediatric ward of a hospital for an etiological diagnosis and for treatment. Based on maternal history and a clinical evaluation, the patient was diagnosed with neonatal vulgar pemphigus. His progression was satisfactory and, in the end, he did not need pharmacological interventions. The cases reported in the literature and the references evaluated reveal that neonatal pemphigus is rare, but that knowledge about the disease allows for an early diagnosis to be made. This has great clinical relevance considering that the disease usually manifests itself in the form of extensive epidermal lesions, even though it is transient and benign, it does not require specific treatment, and it does not have any relation with possible future diseases.
30066825 To evaluate the association between family history and the presence of dyslipidemia in children. A cross-sectional study with 257 children aged 4 to 7 years old from Viçosa, Minas Gerais, Southeast Brazil. Nutritional status and lipid profile (total cholesterol, cholesterol fractions, and triglyceride) assessments and an active search for a family history of dyslipidemia in parents were carried out. Pearson's chi-square test was used to identify associations, and Student's t-test was used to compare means. A Poisson regression analysis was performed to assess the independent association between family history and the presence of dyslipidemia in children. A significance level of 5% was adopted. Children of parents with dyslipidemia had higher serum concentrations of total cholesterol and triglycerides. In a regression analysis after adjustments, the presence of dyslipidemia in the father or in the mother (OR: 2.43; 95%CI 1.12-5.27), as well as the presence of dyslipidemia in both the father and the mother (OR: 5.62; 95%CI 2.27-13.92) were associated with hypertriglyceridemia in children. Children of parents with dyslipidemia had a higher prevalence of elevated low-density lipoproteins (LDL-c) (OR: 1.52; 95%CI 1.18-1.97). An investigation of the family history of dyslipidemia should be made as part of the protocol to verify the presence of hypertriglyceridemia and dyslipidemia in children.
30066826 To describe an uncommon case of infection by Strongyloides stercoralis (S. stercoralis) in a 4-month-old child and to highlight the importance of early diagnosis. The patient was a male child from the city of Videira, State of Santa Catarina, Southern Brazil, who was born preterm by Cesarean-section, weighing 1,655 g, and stayed in the neonatal intensive care unit for 20 days. At four months of age, the child started presenting blood in stools and the possibility of cow's milk protein allergy was considered, given the symptoms and the use of infant formula in his 1st semester of life, which was then replaced by infant formula with hydrolyzed protein. White blood cell count and a parasitological stool sample were requested. Both tested positive and the stool ova and parasite examination showed a rhabditoid larva of S. stercoralis. The clinician maintained the initial hypothesis and diet, but requested three new stool samples, which tested positive for rhabditoid larvae of S. stercoralis. Since the child presented abdominal pain and vomiting, and there was still blood in stools, treatment with thiabendazole was initiated twice a day for two days. Treatment was repeated after seven days along with a new parasitological examination, which was then negative. Although strongyloidiasis is usually a mild parasitic infection, it may be severe and disseminated in immunocompromised patients. This agent must be considered in patients who live in endemic areas, and the diagnosis should be established by searching S. stercoralis larvae in tracheal secretions and in stools.
30133548 Peritoneal carcinomatosis is the natural course of gastrointestinal, gynecologic, and primary peritoneal neoplasms. In recent years, our understanding of carcinomatosis has changed; it is no longer considered a disseminated condition, but rather a disease confined to the peritoneum. Thus, the combination of cytoreductive surgery and intraperitoneal chemotherapy has become the cornerstone of control of peritoneal metastases. Traditionally, intraperitoneal chemotherapy is delivered in the form of liquid solutions. However, a new mode of chemotherapy delivery to the abdominal cavity has arisen as an alternative to the conventional method. In Pressurized Intraperitoneal Aerosol Chemotherapy (PIPAC), the liquid solution is aerosolized into a spray, potentiating the distribution and penetration of the chemotherapeutic agent intraperitoneally. The present study aims to describe a novel form of this innovative surgical technique performed for the first time in Brazil, in a modification of the technique originally described for PIPAC: delivery through a single-port device.
30133583 An analysis is presented of A vida sexual (The sexual life), by Portuguese neurologist Egas Moniz, in which the author divulged medical instructions about the sexed body. Complied in two volumes - 'Physiology' and 'Pathology' - in 1902, it was edited 19 times until it was censored under the Portuguese military dictatorship in 1933. In the work, Moniz devises a discourse of sexual differentiation anchored in an extensive bibliography produced between the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries in a context of intense debate about gender roles. Moniz drew on several theories to define sexuality - including eugenics and Freudian theory - to express his idea that 'man is essentially sexual, woman is essentially mother.'
30133598 The rates of cesarean section births significantly increased in Brazil and worldwide in recent years; and along with them, the interest in studying the complications related to this procedure. To assess the early and late maternal complications associated with the mode of delivery in up to six years after labor. This is a prospective cohort study that followed all births in the city of Pelotas, in Southern Brazil (4,244 mothers) in 2004, for a period of 6 years. Descriptive analyses and the association between the outcome and mode of delivery were performed. The control for potential confounding factors was performed using Poisson regression with robust error variance. About half (44.9%) of the women underwent cesarean section. Cesarean sections were associated with a 56% higher risk of early complications, 2.98 times higher risk of postpartum infection, 79% higher risk of urinary tract infection, 2.40 times higher risk of pain, 6.16 times higher risk of headaches, and 12 times higher risk of anesthetic complications compared to the vaginal delivery. Cesarean section was a protection factor against the presence of hemorrhoids. The mode of delivery was not associated with any of the late complications studied. Due to the risk of associated complications, cesarean sections should be performed with caution, when their benefits outweigh the risks.
30133599 The objective of this investigation was to check equity in coverage/complementation of health expenses by the Brazilian Unified Health System (SUS) for people with signs of common mental disorders, in 2008, in the city of São Paulo, Brazil. Cross-sectional study with data from the 2008 São Paulo Health Survey. Individuals aged 16 or older and with signs of common mental disorders were selected and evaluated with the Self-Reporting Questionnaire (SRQ-20). The following aspects were analyzed: demand for SUS, coverage of health expenses by SUS, and health expenses in the previous month, withal according to sociodemographic and health conditions. The search for SUS services was lower among white people with higher per capita incomes, in a stable union, and with higher education degrees. Coverage by SUS was lower for people aged between 45 and 59 years and aged 60 years or older, with higher per capita incomes, with high or technical school, and college degrees. Subjects who spent more on family health were 60 years or older, white, with high per capita income, in a stable union, and with a college degree. Among people with signs of common mental disorders, SUS mainly services and covers the expenses of the poorer population with lower educational level; therefore coverage is unequal and favors who needs it the most. However, considering age, inequity became explicit, since SUS was shown to offer wider coverage of health expenses to the youngest population.
30133653 In recent decades, Brazil has witnessed a proposal to create an extensive basic health care network as the main portal of entry to a universal public health system. Based on the recognition of consistent strides in that direction, the article addresses four issues on some important challenges for the consolidation of the basic health care proposal: (1) the use of the term 'basic health care' as opposed to the usual, hegemonic concept of 'primary health care'; (2) the disconnect or mismatch between the policy's wording and its real-life implementation, underscoring the need for a review of the Brazilian National Basic Health Care Policy (PNAB), which centralizes and standardizes rules and routines for the entire country while overlooking Brazil's continental dimensions, heterogeneity, and wide local diversity; (3) the isolation of basic health care and its peripheral position in the health system, pointing to the need for more complex arrangements in the coordination of care, not left merely under the organization and responsibility of basic health care; and (4) the lack of health policymakers, administrators, and professionals who are prepared and aligned with a project aimed at transforming the country's prevailing health care model.
30133654 Studies have shown the importance of including the user's experience in measuring the usability of medical devices. Still, the user's assessment depends on the context of use for the treatment received. To measure the usability in such a way as to separate these effects and understand the sources affecting users' perceptions, the article proposes an analytical strategy that assesses the effect of the context of use on measuring the device's usability. Next, we create indicators that are free of these effects to understand the overall assessment of the device. Multivariate analysis of variance and exploratory factor analysis are used to achieve the objectives. The study is illustrated by means of a survey of 200 hemodialysis patients in hospitals and clinics in Porto Alegre, Rio Grande do Sul State, Brazil. The results suggest that assessment of the medical device differs (p < 0.05) according to the setting, fistula site, and patient's sex, age, and schooling. The setting influenced the most variables, including the degree of trust in the procedures. Three indicators were created: procedures, treatment setting, and device characteristics. The indicators allowed assessing which equipment brands, types of procedures, and treatment settings provide the best results. The method can be replicated in the assessment of medical devices, training health administrators, and assessing usability through summary indicators, besides identifying aspects to improve usability in medical treatment.
30133656 Obesity is associated with psychosocial problems like stigma, discrimination, and bias. Studies have found that nutritionists and nutrition students display negative attitudes and biases toward obese individuals. This study examined the existence of nutrition students' bias toward obese individuals. The students answered questionnaires by completing on-line forms with demographic data and self-reported weight and height and were assigned to one of four randomly selected hypothetical cases of patients referred to a nutritionist after receiving a diagnosis of lactose intolerance (normal weight man; normal weight woman; obese man; and obese woman). Except for weight, body mass index (BMI), and daily energy intake, all information on diet, habits, and health conditions were identical for profiles of the same sex. The questionnaire included questions on the indication of procedures and approaches during the consultation, consultation time, counseling strategies, dietary and health evaluation, and students' affective and behavioral reactions. Three hundred and thirty-five students participated, mostly women, with mean BMI of 23kg/m². Patient's weight influenced consultation time and students' perceptions and treatment approaches and strategies. The study revealed biases and negative attitudes mainly involving the students' perceptions and reactions to obese patients, and obese women generally received the worse evaluations.
30133657 Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) has become a public health problem with major family, social, and economic impacts. This study aimed to estimate the association between ASD and parents' age at the time of their child's birth. A case-control study was performed, consisting of 243 individuals with ASD (cases) and 886 neurotypical controls. A semi-structured questionnaire was applied, following by multiple logistic regression. Associations between ASD and paternal age (in years) from 25 to 34 (OR = 1.65; 95%CI: 1.01-2.71), 35 to 44 (OR = 1.62; 95%CI: 0.96-2.73), and ≥ 45 (OR = 2.44; 95%CI: 1.14-5.00); and maternal age from 25 to 34 (OR = 2.38; 95%CI: 1.54-3.37) and ≥ 35 (OR = 2.09; 95%CI: 1.29-3.39) were significant when assessed in independent models. However, when included in a single model, only maternal age from 25 to 34 (OR = 2.27; 95%CI: 1.45-3.55) and ≥ 35 years (OR = 2.15; 95%CI: 1.21-3.83) remained associated with ASD. The association was stronger when both parents were older (OR = 4.87; 95%CI: 1.71-13.80). The results have important implications for clinical psychiatry and public health, since parents' age at childbirth has increased. Emphasis is needed on the prevention of late childbearing and screening and follow-up of children born to these couples.
30133659 The objective was to analyze the impact of the Brazilian Traffic Code and the Law Against Drinking and Driving on mortality from traffic accidents in the State of Paraná, Brazil, from 1980 to 2014. This was an ecological time series study on mortality from traffic accidents in residents 15 to 49 years of age, stratified by the sex, age, and categories of victims, with data from the Mortality Information System. The time trend study used a segmented linear regression model and the Cochrane-Orcutt iterative procedure. The assumption of independence of residuals was verified by correlograms and the Box-Pierce test. The highest mortality rates during the period were in males 20 to 29 years of age. After enactment of the Brazilian Traffic Code, there was a decrease of 9.69 deaths/100,000 inhabitants per year for all categories of traffic accidents (p < 0.001), 6.90 for pedestrians (p = 0.001), and 1.96 for vehicle occupants (p < 0.001). As for age bracket, the greatest impact on mortality was in pedestrians 15 to 19 years of age (p < 0.001) and all victims 20 to 29 years of age (p < 0.001). Following enactment of the Drinking and Driving Law, the data displayed variability and the trends were not significant. However, there was a decrease in overall and pedestrian mortality. The rates for motorcyclists and vehicle occupants stabilized. The results showed an impact on traffic accident mortality after enactment of the new Brazilian Traffic Code and Drinking and Driving Law, followed by an increase in the rates. The study evidenced the need for more effective enforcement and progress with public policies in order to avoid a reversal of the gains achieved.
30133660 The study analyzed the use of the Paideia Method for training professionals that use matrix support in Curitiba (Paraná State), Uberlândia (Minas Gerais State), and Campinas (São Paulo State), Brazil. An 18-month training process (Specialization Course) was developed for this purpose with matrix support professionals. This was a qualitative study inspired by action-based research, research-intervention, and evaluation by triangulation of methods. Data production used field observation strategies with records kept in a field diary, semi-structured interviews with a questionnaire, and focus group. Data from the questionnaires were submitted to descriptive analysis. The qualitative data collected with participant observation and focus groups were analyzed with the construction of narratives. The study showed that Paideia Training fostered changes in the work process and in clinical practice among the teams. However, the full utilization of the matrix support methodology is heavily influenced by the institutional setting and management and healthcare models. An important difference was observed between the fields according to the degree of democratization and management's support for organizational changes.
30133663 The study focuses on policies to deal with violence against women in the city of São Paulo, Brazil. The objectives were to map the public policies and the proposals for institutional organization of a network of comprehensive care, in addition to analyzing the implementation of these policies, highlighting the health sector, with reports by administrators and policymakers. The study addresses the relationship between management practice and the public policy provisions, the weight of administrators' personal values and perspectives, and the weight of the socially dominant discourse in decision-making for implementation of these policies. Data were produced through semi-structured interviews with 32 administrators working at different levels in the institutional organization of the Municipal Health Department, including some policymakers in the state and national scenarios. The body of data were submitted to thematic content analysis, examining each of the interviews and relating them to the literature and conceptual framework. The study concludes that health administrators, as agents of practices, are influenced by the prevailing structures and beliefs and reference to their social and historical context for decision-making. However, when they relate to such structures, they are also capable of intervening in the ways care is produced and provided for women in situations of violence, especially by addressing the training and awareness-raising processes and new references concerning recognition of women's rights as human rights.
30133664 Obesity is considered a serious public health problem, as an epidemic disease with major global repercussions that is associated with the development of other chronic conditions such as hypertension, diabetes, and cardiovascular diseases. The current study examines the distribution of adult obesity in different countries using a beta regression model. This is a descriptive ecological study with a quantitative and inferential approach and a focus on beta regression analysis. Application of this method used a set of real data from public sources on adult obesity in 78 countries in 2014. Descriptive data analysis showed that 50% of the countries showed adult obesity prevalence greater than 20%. In addition, analysis of the distribution of prevalence by country showed lower adult obesity levels in countries of Asia and Africa. Meanwhile, higher values were found in countries of the Americas and Europe. Boxplot analysis also evidenced a possible difference in the proportion of obese adults between the Americas and Europe on one side and Africa and Asia on the other. Adjustment of the beta regression model with varying dispersion and 5% significance identified mean annual per capita alcohol intake, percentage of insufficient physical activity, percentage of the population living in urban areas, and life expectancy as variables associated with adult obesity.
30133666 This article aims to analyze how expressions of sexuality and gender emerge in the legal proceedings that determine the fate of individuals at the interface between crime and madness. The text explores the criminal proceedings against persons in mental distress that have committed crimes, or so-called 'criminally insane' patients, and who are subject to security measures. Using genealogy as the methodological approach, the article analyzes the conditions underlying the source and emergence of the 'abnormal', a figure produced and scrutinized by forensic medical discourse. Six court briefs were analyzed, focusing especially on the psychiatric reports pertaining to non-heterosexual and/or non-cisgender persons that were subjected to security measures. Analysis of the textual corpus indicates that the theoretical and conceptual basis for the assumptions in the security measures focuses on the forensic psychiatric report. The analysis of the forensic medical discourse points to a moral judgment of the expressions of sexuality and gender in the criminally insane patient, considered 'deviant'. Finally, the article signals alternatives for the production of new treatment modalities for the criminally insane patient, seeking to supplant the presumption of danger to society as a purportedly scientific concept, reviewing non-imputability as a legal device that violates the inalienable rights of individuals at the interface between crime and madness.
30133667 This field research aimed to identify healthcare integration among four twin cities in Paraná State, Brazil, the determinants of cross-border movements of foreigners, and the obstacles to such integration. Data were collected through in-depth interviews with key informants that were analyzed with thematic content analysis. The results showed that asymmetries in the structure, resources, supply, and quality of the network's health services are determinants of cross-border movements. The experiences with integration are limited basically to emergency measures in health surveillance. Working groups are formed with limited case-resolution capacity, depending on personal, non-institutionalized initiatives. Public underfinancing is a limiting factor for access to health services. Municipal health services managers play a leading role in border areas, and they should be acknowledged as international political actors.
30133669 The aim was to analyze the prevalence of falls requiring visits to health services and associated sociodemographic factors in the elderly in the Brazilian National Health Survey (PNS), 2013. This was a cross-sectional population-based study using data on 23,815 elderly Brazilians from the PNS 2013 survey. The outcome variable was falls requiring use of a health service. Crude and adjusted analyses were performed with robust Poisson regression, with prevalence ratio as the measure of effect and the respective 95% confidence interval (95%CI). The stepwise-forward method was used for inclusion of the variables in the multivariate model. The prevalence of falls with the need to seek health services was 7.8% (95%CI: 7.3-8.4). The administrative region with the lowest occurrence of falls was the Southeast (7.3%), and Rondônia was the state with the lowest prevalence (5.3%). In the multivariate analysis, falls were associated with age 75 years or older, female sex, and divorced or separated marital status. The nationally representative data produced by the PNS survey can enhance measures to prevent falls throughout Brazil.
30133670 The field of work rehabilitation in Brazil recently incorporated changes in its underlying concepts and principles, expanding the definition of incapacity for work based on the biopsychosocial health model and adopting a territorial approach and inter-sector practices, with a view towards backing the implementation of an integrated inter-sector work rehabilitation model. However, these conceptual and normative advancements have still not been implemented in practice; they have actually come under threat from Brazil's on-going political crisis. This article discusses the current scenario in the work rehabilitation program under the Brazilian National Social Security Institute (INSS), presents the strides in the underlying theoretical premises and the concerns of work rehabilitation in the face of recent measures that reinforce the biomedical basis and the compensatory policy that led the program over the years, and signal the impending privatization of this social security service and right. The article suggests that work rehabilitation faces a scenario of uncertainties and concerns, intensified by the institutional undermining of the INSS. Rapid structural changes in the INSS and in the work rehabilitation program have undermined the gains that had promoted the initial development of a comprehensive, inter-sector work rehabilitation program aimed at healthy return to work.
30133688 Paracoccidioidomycosis is a systemic fungal disease associated with agricultural activities. Its incidence and prevalence are underestimated because of the lack of reporting in several Brazilian states. If paracoccidiodomycosis is not diagnosed and treated early and adequately, endemic fungal infection may result in serious sequelae. In addition to the Paracoccidioides brasiliensis (P. brasiliensis) complex, the appearance of a new species, Paracoccidioides lutzii (P. lutzii), in Rondônia state, where the disease has reached epidemic levels, and in the country's Midwest region and Pará state, are challenges to diagnosis and to the urgent availability of antigens that are reactive with patients' sera. These guidelines aim to update the first Brazilian consensus on paracoccidioidomycosis by providing evidence-based recommendations for bedside patient management. The guidelines provide data on etiology, epidemiology, immunopathogenesis, diagnosis, treatment and sequelae, with emphasis on diagnosis and treatment, as well as current recommendations and challenges in this field of knowledge.
30137116 Recent discussions in medical discourse seek to demonstrate the apparent progressive omission of the subject as well as the notion of subjectivity in the development of modern medicine, both in its foundations in clinical practice and in its basic theoretical framework. As a result, they reveal that medicine has evolved in the understanding of the ailment, while still leaving a blind spot regarding the experience of suffering. In terms of a reaction countless attempts to restore subjectivity in the therapeutic process and medical discourse were have been conducted, aiming at comprehensive and humanized care through what might be called exteriority discourse. Using Jung's analytical psychology as a benchmark, the experience of suffering and its consequences are present in clinical practice as expressions of subjectivity in the theoretical and practical fields.
30137118 The scope off this article is to assess the prevalence and identify associated factors with severe low back pain (LBP) during pregnancy among mothers living in Rio Grande, in the south of Brazil, in 2013. A standardized questionnaire was applied by trained interviewers within 48 hours after delivery. Multivariate analysis was carried out using Poisson regression. The prevalence ratio was the effect measure used. Among the 2,685 pregnant women enrolled in the study, 51.2% reported LBP and 27.3% reported severe LBP, which was more likely to occur among adolescents, with overweight/obese individuals, former smokers and those who practiced physical activity during pregnancy. Among those with severe LBP, 29.2%, 37.3% and 33.3% reported limitations for daily activities at home, had to seek medical care and had to miss work due to this problem, respectively. The prevalence of severe LBP during pregnancy is high and its impact for daily life and health services is concerning. The management of LBP should be part of routine pre-natal consultation.
30137119 The scope of this study was to evaluate the knowledge of the elderly about syphilis and AIDS before and after conducting educational activities. Fifty-five individuals participating in a convenience group from territory of Terrenos Novos in Sobral in the State of Ceará were selected. To collect the data, a semi-structured questionnaire about HIV/AIDS and syphilis was used, including general features and information about concept, transmission, prevention, vulnerability and treatment. The questionnaire was applied before and after the implementation of educational workshops about AIDS and syphilis. Among those surveyed, 96.4% were aware about AIDS and 67.3% did not know about syphilis. However, 38.1% believed that a kiss on the mouth and 78.1% that mosquito bites were means of HIV transmission. 70.9% did not know the mode of transmission of syphilis. After the workshops the indexes changed positively. Data analysis revealed gaps in knowledge of this group about the concept, transmission and treatment of these diseases. Educational interventions were effective for knowledge assimilation.
30137120 The aim of the present study was to evaluate factors associated with falls in community-dwelling older adults diagnosed with cataracts. An analytical, cross-sectional study was conducted with a sample of community-dwelling older adults residing in the Federal District of Brazil. Interviews and assessment tools were administered, such as the Timed Up and Go test, Short Physical Performance Battery (SPPB), Biodex Balance System, Katz Index, Lawton Scale, Minnesota Leisure Time Physical Activity Questionnaire and Mini Mental State Examination. Statistical analysis involved binary logistic regression. One hundred forty-two older adults (85 with cataracts) participated in the study (mean age: 69.39 ± 5.67 years). Falls were associated with the female sex (OR: 4.45) and sub-maximum score on the SPPB (OR: 3.53) among patients with cataracts, whereas multimorbidity (OR: 5.10) was the risk factor risk for older adults without cataracts. The data suggest different risk factors for falls among older adults diagnosed with cataracts.
30137123 This cross-sectional study evaluated the food intake patterns related to cardiovascular risk disease among people living with HIV/AIDS (PLWHA) with viral suppression and receiving highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART). Food intake was obtained by the annual food frequency questionnaire, separated into two groups, healthy and unhealthy food related intake and cardiovascular disease. Data were analyzed using Student's t Test for independent samples or the Mann-Whitney U Test and Fisher's exact test, with a significance level of p < 0.05. The sample consisted of 45 individuals with HIV/AIDS (60% female). The intake of unhealthy foods for cardiovascular risk was greater compared to the intake of healthy foods, both in men (3.91 ± 0.26 vs. 2.79 ± 0.32 p = 0.01) and women (3.40 ± 0.23 vs. 2.60 ± 0.29 p = 0.04). Metabolic syndrome prevalence was 33.3% in men and 37% in women. Men presented hypertriglyceridemia (50%) and low HDL (44%) and women presented central obesity (54%, p = 0.05 vs. men) hypercholesterolemia (66.7% p = 0.02 vs. men) and hypertriglyceridemia (46%). Study results indicate the presence of unhealthy food intake patterns and a high prevalence of cardiovascular risk factors in the evaluated subjects.
30137124 This study aimed to evaluate the socioeconomic and demographic factors, behaviors and morbidities related to common mental disorders in adult women. This was a cross-sectional population-based study with cluster sample. We analyzed 848 women from a household survey held in Campinas, in 2008/2009. We used the Self-Reporting Questionnaire (SRQ-20) to evaluate common mental disorders. We estimated prevalence ratios by Poisson regression in hierarchical model of three steps, considering the weights relating to the sampling design. The prevalence of common mental disorders was 18.7%. The hierarchical model showed that older women, with low education level, housewives, separated or widowed, who did not consume fruit/vegetables daily, who slept six or fewer hours per night, who presented several chronic diseases and health problems, and with report of some type of violence were more vulnerable to common mental disorders and, therefore, should be treated with priority by health services. Early diagnosing women with common mental disorders, as well as accompanying and treating them, contribute for reducing the impacts on female quality of life.
30137125 Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is recognized as a complex disease that requires multiple approaches to its treatment. The aim of this study was to evaluate the impact of a nutritional intervention program on the nutritional status and quality of life of elderly pre-dialysis CKD patients. A prospective cohort study was carried out involving 64 elderly stage 3 CKD patients receiving treatment at a Primary Care Center in the Municipality of Diadema in the State of São Paulo, Brazil. The nutritional intervention consisted of one individual and three group meetings. Nutritional status was assessed using anthropometric variables and classified according to Body Mass Index (BMI). Cardiovascular risk was classified according to Waist Circumference (WC). Quality of life was assessed using the WHOQOL-BREF. The data was analyzed adopting a significance level of 5%. Mean age was 73.95 ± 7.84 years and the majority of the sample were women, had a low level of schooling, and low monthly income. With respect to nutritional status, 21.9% of the sample were underweight, 32.8% overweight, and 62.6% were at a high or very high risk of developing cardiovascular disease. The nutritional intervention program had a positive impact on nutritional status, leading to a decline in BMI and WC, reduction in risk of developing heart disease, increased satisfaction with current state of health, and improved quality of life.
30137126 The objective of this study was to evaluate the use of drugs and the factors associated with polypharmacy in patients with diabetes mellitus (DM) in Minas Gerais. Descriptive analysis of drugs in use and logistic regression to estimate the association between socio-demographic and clinical characteristics with polypharmacy were performed. Of the 2619 respondents, 56.5% were in polypharmacy. Drugs for DM, agent in renin-angiotensin system, and diuretics are the most frequently used. Factors such as age, comorbidities and increased access to health services were associated with polypharmacy. It was observed high prevalence of polypharmacy, which requires a suitable care and better quality of drug use in this population.
30137128 The scope of the study was to evaluate the temporal trend and spatial distribution of congenital syphilis (CS) in the state of Rio Grande do Sul. All cases reported by the SINASC/DATASUS between 2001 and 2012 were included. The number of live births was obtained from DATASUS. Incidence rates of CS were grouped according to micro-regions of IBGE and analyzed for the entire period and for triennia. The spatial correlation was analyzed by the global Moran index (I) and the local index. 3,613 cases were reported. Between 2007 and 2012 89 neonates (3.6%) died. Rates varied from to 1.03 in 2001 to 5.1 cases per 1000 live births in 2012, with an annual increase of 0.84 cases per 1000 live births (p < 0.01) and 93.88% of explained variance. The micro-regions were spatially independent (I = 0.06; p = 0.25), with Porto Alegre having the highest incidence (4.19 cases / 1000 live births) and Jaguarão the lowest (0.23 cases / 1000 live births). Micro-regions with significant local spatial dependence were observed. The increase in cases of CS highlights poor prenatal quality care. Identification of the micro-regions with the highest incidence is essential to focus public policy on this health problem.
30137129 A cross-sectional study was conducted to evaluate and compare dietary intake, type of assistance (Basic Health Units - UBS and Family Health Strategies - ESF) and participation in the 'Bolsa Família' Program (PBF) among users of the Brazilian Unified Health System, (SUS). The sample was composed of individuals of both sexes between 18 and 78 years of age in Porto Alegre, state of Rio Grande do Sul. Socioeconomic, clinical and food consumption data were collected via a questionnaire adapted from the SISVAN and VIGITEL national surveys. The analyses were conducted using R3.1 software. Of the 187 patients, 91 were affiliated to the ESF, 96 to UBS and 40 were registered with the PBF. A healthy eating pattern was identified in only 41% of SUS users. It was observed that 55% did not consume raw salad (37% p = 0.04) and vegetable consumption was lower among the PBF users (67.5% versus 75.9%; p = 0.02). There was no significant difference in food consumption considering the kind of assistance (ESF or UBS). A healthy consumption pattern was not associated with demographic and socioeconomic variables. The majority of beneficiaries of the PBF did not admit to healthy eating patterns. Therefore, effective health promotion and prevention is needed for this population, mainly among the beneficiaries of the PBF.
30137130 This study aimed to identify the determinants of low birth weight (LBW) amongst children of adolescent mothers through a hierarchical approach in a cross-sectional study of 751 adolescents attended at a public hospital in Rio de Janeiro. Sociodemographic data, prenatal care, and biological and maternal obstetric conditions were analyzed. Possible determinants of LBW were identified in the bivariate analysis and then hierarchical logistic regression models were tested, considering as taggered hierarchy of distal, intermediate, and proximal levels. Variables with p < 0.05 at each level of analysis were kept in the model, and the adjusted odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence interval (CI) were estimated. The prevalence of low birth weight was 10%. The determinants of LBW were: distal level - non-acceptance of pregnancy (OR = 10.19, 95% CI = 1.09 to 39.53); intermediate level - having fewer than six prenatal consultations (OR = 4.29; 95% CI = 1.55 to 11.83) and not having standardized nutritional care (OR = 3.18; 95% CI = 1.18 to 8.55); and proximal level - preterm delivery (OR = 10.19, 95% CI = 2.12 to 49.01). The determinants of LBW were maternal characteristics, prenatal care, and birth conditions, which contain certain modifiable social characteristics.
30137131 This is a partial analysis of the outcome of a survey looking at user perception of the institutional use of Complementary and Alternative Medicine (CAM) in Florianópolis healthcare centers. Structured interviews were applied to users treated with CAM in the locations offering this option most often, using data-based theory as a theoretical-methodological reference. For the most part, the use of CAM was proposed by basic health professionals (the operators of biomedical care), initially as a preferred alternative to biomedicine. Interviewees preferred CAM, associating it to fewer side-effects. Users mentioned enhanced dialog with professionals to negotiate treatment forms. The hypothesis emerged that CAM could be the initial treatment option in a large number of cases, saving conventional treatment for subsequent use if necessary, or in some cases as the single or complementary treatment. This enables drafting an expanded flow using CAMs in primary healthcare. New studies and institutional experience are required to investigate this hypothesis, expanding the use of CAM in an ecology of institutional care.
30137132 Pemphigus is a group of autoimmune blistering diseases that affect the skin and mucous membranes, the global incidence of which is 0.75 to 5 / 1.000.000 cases a year. The approach taken derives from the relations of power/truth and subjectivity that produce modes of experience from the perspective of hospitals and public policies. It involves cartographic qualitative research, supported from a Deleuzian standpoint. The objective was to discuss pemphigus as a chronic disease and discuss health policies and their impact on care practices. This cartography was conducted in a philanthropical hospital, which is a national reference for the treatment of pemphigus. The research was conducted from September 2012 to February 2013. The analysis of materials included: medical records, field diary reports of all healthcare activities, such as medical consultations, technical procedures performed by nursing staff and medical staff and reports of patients, families, physicians, and nursing staff. The analyses were created from a Foucauldian historical and genealogical perspective. The conclusion reached is that health policies for chronic patients with pemphigus are not presented as a condition to be avoided / prevented, but as abnormal groups and bio identities that have no effect on the whole population.
30137133 This article examines the strategy for construction of a System of Indicators for Monitoring the Public Policies and Health Situation of the Elderly (SISAP-Idoso). The System seeks to assess the production of health information with the political/institutional decision, serving as a management tool in the health of the elderly. Its focus is to meet the need of the Unified Health System municipal managers for information for planning and controlling health programs. The paper presents the methods used in the creation of the Conceptual Matrix for Health Dimensions and Conceptual Matrix for Monitoring and Evaluation of Policies. The first systematizes a panel of indicators to diagnose the health condition of the elderly, a procedure without which one cannot properly plan health actions. The second selects indicators to monitor implementation and evaluate the results of health policies and programs for the elderly. The System became an important tool to support the formulation and monitoring of health programs, particularly at the local level. Moreover, it is a powerful tool of social control and population empowerment. The full incorporation of the System depends on the consolidation of information and indicators as parts of the policy process.
30137134 This article describes the elements present in medical practice that contribute to understand its acknowledged low adhesion to the guidelines set forth by the Brazilian Primary Health Care (PHC) Policy. The empirical material produced by the two investigations of a qualitative nature led by the research team were put into use. In the first, in interviews involving managers and social control in cities the State of São Paulo, Brazil, physicians (acknowledged as central professionals for the construction of the Brazilian Unified Health System - SUS), are referred to as important assets to explain the difficulties to form a qualified primary health care service: the so-called 'villain physicians.' In the latter, ethnographic/cartographic research carried out in seven PHC Units in cities of São Paulo, with the use of scenes showing the doctors in action and/or thinking about their jobs, and the health team observing their work, more complex physicians emerge: fragile professionals with a reduced set of instruments to act before the 'social factor' that invade their practices, threatened in their autonomy, finding it hard to engage in teamwork, dispossessed of their regulatory functions, and unaware of the space reserved for primary practices: decidedly human physicians - neither heroes nor villains.
30137135 This study aimed to characterize women's socioeconomic and epidemiological profile in Uberaba according to the breast cancer screening practice and identify associated factors with this practice. This is a cross-sectional research part of the Women's Health Survey in Uberaba (MG). Data was collected by home interview, referring to socioeconomic and epidemiological issues and breast cancer screening practice, from a sample of 1,520 women above 20 years of age. After processing the data, we performed statistical analysis with measures of association by the Chi-square test, bivariate and multivariate Poisson regression, with a significance level of 5%. The results showed a profile of breast cancer screening practice with white women (66%), high schooling and per capita income, in common-law marriage (67,5%), non-heads of households (64,4%) and non-smokers (64,6%). Factors associated with higher practice were the age groups 40-49 and 50-69 years (PR = 0.7 and 0.64), per capita income higher than one minimum wage (PR = 1.17) and public or health plan mammography coverage (PR = 1.98 and 1.94). We can conclude that factors associated with breast cancer screening practice have been identified in the studied sample.
30137136 The National School Food Program (NSFP) recommends the promotion of healthy eating habits by offering meals along with food and nutrition education (FNE) actions. The objective of this study was to identify the FNE in the NSFP and its relationship with the nutritionist's profile. It involved an analytical, cross-sectional study conducted in cities in the state of of Goiás, Brazil. Data was collected by telephone, and the association between the outcome variable (achievement of FNE actions) and exposure (school population and nutritionist performance) was done by Pearson's chi-square test of with a 5% significance level. In this study, 214 (87%) municipalities were included, among which, 91.1% promote FNE actions with predominantly biannual frequency (25.3% in schools and 23.2% in day care centers). The nutritionist presence was associated to the FNE (p = 0.001). FNE actions are performed in most municipalities, however with low frequency. The association indicates the relevance of a nutritionist present in conditions that heed the legislation, enabling the performance of their duties, as defined by the Legal Framework of the NSFP and the Federal Council of Nutritionists.
30137137 Population aging is a global trend that has drawn attention to policies to encourage a productive life and delayed retirement. Thus, it is necessary to expand our understanding of the effects of work on health indicators and well-being in old age. The purpose of this study was to determine the association of permanency in the labor market with sociodemographic and medical factors and life satisfaction in elders. We used the database from Study FIBRA-RJ including elderly (aged > 65) clients of a private health care plan who resided in northern districts of the municipality of Rio de Janeiro. Among the 626 participants, 82 (13,1%) maintained paid jobs. Multiple logistic regression showed that the odds of remaining working among the elderly were higher for men; and those with 9 years of studies or more, and those with high income; and those with no disabling clinical conditions and with higher satisfaction with life. This study confirms that work activities in old age are associated with better social and physical health conditions. Moreover, we observed that the maintenance of work activities was associated with higher life satisfaction, independent of socioeconomic and clinical characteristics in old age.
30137138 The scope of this article is to evaluate the body image and its association with body composition, anthropometric indicators and sedentary behavior of female adolescents. It involved a cross-sectional study with female adolescents from Viçosa in the state of Minas Gerais. The body image was assessed by the Body Shape Questionnaire (BSQ) and by the Silhouette Scale. The body fat percentage (BFP) and other anthropometric parameters were measured. The sedentary behavior (SB) was evaluated by the sum of screen time (ST) and cellular time (CT). The sample consisted of 274 adolescents, the majority having an adequate BMI (81.6%), however, 53.9% had elevated BFP. More than half of the adolescents had elevated SB, 68.2% with ST and 54.7% with CT above 2h. Body dissatisfaction was expressed as 45.7% by BSQ and 50.2% wished for a silhouette different than the current silhouette. The waist circumference (WC) (OR = 11.94, CI = 2.744 - 51.728) and waist-to-height ratio (WHR) (OR = 10.535, CI = 3.109 - 35.698) were the measurements most associated with body dissatisfaction. All body composition measurements were significantly associated with body dissatisfaction, and the WC and WHR the most conditioning factors with dissatisfaction. The SB was elevated; however, it was not associated with a negative assessment of body image.
30137139 The scope of the article was to evaluate food consumption according to the type of food consumed in rural schools. A cross-sectional descriptive study was conducted among adolescents enrolled in 12 rural public schools in Canguçu in the state of Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil. The research was linked to the intervention named 'Physical Education +: Practicing Health in School.' Dietary intake was evaluated using consumption markers from the Brazilian Food and Nutrition Surveillance System. The main independent variable was the type of food consumed at school (brought from home, provided by the school free of charge and/or purchased at school). Descriptive statistics and the Chi-square test were used and the significance level was p<0.05. The study enlisted 526 students, 51.3% female and 88.0% consuming food free of charge. From 15% to 31% of adolescents consumed foods considered unhealthy for more than three days in the preceding week. Students who reported taking a snack to school consumed raw salad, fresh fruit or fruit salad, biscuits/crackers and packet snacks and soft drinks more frequently. It was concluded that the consumption of healthy foods among schoolchildren in rural areas was low and interventions are needed to improve the current situation of inadequate feeding practices.
30137140 The main objective of this study was to identify risk factors for neonatal death in an inland region of the State of São Paulo. A case-control study was conducted using a case group of 162 child deaths that occurred in 2009 in the state's VI Regional Health Department - Bauru. The control group consisted of 324 children selected from the Live Births Information System database who shared the same birth date and city of residence. Univariate and hierarchical multiple logistic regression analyses were performed to identify the factors associated with neonatal death by calculating crude odds ratios adjusted for potential confounders and respective 95% confidence intervals. The likelihood of neonatal death was greater among women who had had a history of infant death (OR = 24.97, CI = 12.20 to 51.10) and who had had only up to three antenatal appointments (OR = 11.40, CI = 5, 92 to 21.93), and among infants born at less than 28 weeks of gestation (OR = 168.00, CI = 49.63 to 568.66). The influence of birth weight was also observed among newborns weighing under 1,500g. This study identified five independent risk factors for neonatal death, the most notable of which is maternal history of neonatal death, which has not been properly acknowledged as a risk factor by previous studies.
30137141 This study aimed to analyze the neuropsychomotor performance of children by implementing the Denver Developmental Screening Test-II (DDST-II). We evaluated a sample of 318 children aged 36 to 48 months. Results indicated that girls performed better in three of the four areas analyzed in the test: Personal-Social (p < 0.001), Fine Motor-adaptive (p = 0.020) and Language (p = 0.028). No significant difference was observed between genders in the Gross Motor skills area. Analyzing the performance of children in implementing the tasks expected in the test, we found significant differences in the following items: in the Personal-Social area, the worst-performing item was 'Brushes teeth without help'; in the Fine Motor area, the worst-performing item was 'shows the longest line'; in the Language area, the worst-performing items were 'Knows two adjectives', 'Knows four actions' and 'Understands four prepositions'; and in the Gross Motor area, the worst-performing item was 'Hops on one foot'. The results suggest that socially-imposed standards, based on gender differences, may interfere with the neuropsychomotor behavior of children. Furthermore, knowing such development profile is crucial in the formulation of public policies and actions that can contribute to child development.
30137142 Breastfeeding is a multifaceted phenomenon involving the complexity of the social world, the roles assumed by women, their attributes and social expectations. This theoretical essay proposes a reflection on motherhood, problematizing the experience of breastfeeding and the construction of social identity in line with Anselm Levi Strauss's sociological concepts of interactionism. This article sought to make associations between body, identity, and socialization processes in adulthood, generated by new social demands in fulfilling the roles of woman and mother, focusing on the breastfeeding experience. The way motherhood is conceived in contemporary society and the register of breastfeeding as a phenomenon of nature are problematized to give the woman a vocation to motherhood and breastfeeding, producing a social expectation of the innate ability to perform them.
30137145 Alarming data on the part of health care providers on the increase of the claim rate and its potential risk has emerged. It is a descriptive study, with the objective of understanding the changes in the healthcare provider sector in recent years, using the temporal analysis of historical series related to the sector. The variables selected for this study were the claim rate, the coverage rate, and the number of private healthcare providers in activity, observed from 2003 to 2014. The method used for evaluation of the temporal trend was Linear Regression. The claim rate and the coverage rate show an upward trend in the period, while the number of operators in Brazil showed a decreasing trend during the same period. These results show that even with the increase in demand, there was a decrease in the number of operators active in the country. The claim rate is one of the possible causes observed this inverse relationship because the increased offers risks of survival and the opening of new operators. Moreover, the decrease in the number of providers, is leading the country to an oligopolistic industry with an increasing demand in the number of beneficiaries. This decrease is also associated with regulatory processes, which regulates the sector's relationship with the beneficiary.
30137153 To investigate the socioeconomic, demographic and cultural elements that interfere in the adherence to the use of condoms in an open population. A cross-sectional study with a quantitative approach was conducted through an explanatory household survey, in the municipality of Caraúbas, West Potiguar mesoregion, with 3 482 individuals older than 18. A Likert questionnaire was administered by community health agents in a household setting. Descriptive statistics were performed, followed by univariate and bivariate analyzes, using the Chi-square test. The most receptive groups to condom use are the earliest age groups, male subjects, participants who do not have a stable relationship, and those with a higher education level. The association between condom and condom use showed that the more affluent strata represented less condom adoption. The reasons for condom abandonment were the preference for another contraceptive method and the confidence in the partner, and the main reason for its use was prevention against sexually transmitted diseases. Adherence to condom use is scarce in all the groups considered. The popularization of the method must be fostered by individual and collective measures directed to consider the use of condoms for a dual purpose, by expanding information through sex education campaigns and overcoming gender conflicts.
30137157 To investigate self-esteem, body image and depression in adolescents under different nutritional conditions. The study included 418 adolescents (14-18 years old). Four questionnaires were administered: Characterization; Child Depression Inventory; Self-esteem Scale, and Body Image Questionnaire. The nutritional conditions were classified using the Body Mass Index (BMI). Boys had a higher prevalence of overweight or obesity, a lower depression and body dissatisfaction rate, and higher self-esteem than girls (p<0.001). Depression was negatively related to self-esteem (p<0.01), which also had a negative association with body dissatisfaction (p<0.01). Even though adolescents with superior nutritional conditions were more dissatisfied (p<0.001), the BMI was related to body dissatisfaction only in girls (p<0.01). Regarding the relation between depression and body dissatisfaction, it was negative for boys (p<0.01), but positive for girls (p<0.01). Overweight or obese adolescents have higher body dissatisfaction. Depression and self-esteem are related to body image, and not to BMI, demonstrating that the subjectivity of adolescents must be assessed. The differences identified between boys and girls for these relations must be further investigated.
30137158 To evaluate access to technologies for prevention and control of Congenital Syphilis (CS) by pregnant women. Multi-case study that analyzed prenatal care to pregnant women with syphilis, which aimed at identifying the aspects that hinder their access to soft, soft-hard and hard health technologies that may contribute to the prevention of SC. The field research was done from April to September 2011 at four Health Units of two Regional Executive Divisions in Fortaleza City. Data was collected through observation and interviews with the health professionals and coordinators of the different units, the Statistic Medical Attendance Service professionals, health agents and pregnant women. Soft technologies include active search for pregnant women and home visits; light-hard technologies correspond to counseling, and hard technologies to the gathering of biological material for the serological diagnosis of syphilis and the treatment of pregnant woman and their sexual partners. The analysis consisted in contextualizing and interpreting the meanings of the answers obtained considering access as the main focus. Professionals have difficulty dealing with the subjective issues that involve sexually transmitted infections, and the units have problems in organizational aspects, continuity of care delivery and physical structure, which compromise the access of pregnant women to the technologies for prevention and control of CS. Pregnant women with syphilis do not have access to different technologies for prevention and control of CS, a situation that makes early diagnosis of syphilis unfeasible and possibly contributes to poor syphilis indicators in Fortaleza.
30137160 To evaluate the association of work factors with goals set in specialized dental centers (SDCs) of Southern Brazil. Cross-sectional exploratory study, in which the databases DATASUS, IBGE, SIOPS were used and complemented with an online questionnaire (FORMSUS). The questionnaire was answered by SDC managers. The Kruskal Wallis test was utilized to determine association of factors. Nine hundred and thirty six months, corresponding to 78 SDCs, were analyzed; the response rate of the questionnaires was 68%. It was found that the variables Paraná State, municipalities with population size of 0-50 thousand/inhabitants, and the fourth quartile of total health expenditure and Gross National Product per capita were factors associated with goals achievement of periodontal procedures. The type of SDCs showed association with goals achievement of basics procedures. Analyzes of the variables that may be associated with outpatient treatment in of SDCs are fundamental to verify issues regarding population access and applicability of public resources in the health area. The study indicates low achievement goals by outpatient care delivery by specialized dental centers, which may indicate important factors associated with higher number months for achieving goals.
30137162 To identify and characterize the risk factors of pressure ulcers (PU) in patients admitted in a Portuguese Hospital. Descriptive and cross-sectional study with a sample consisting of 34 individuals, 70.6 % male and 29.4 % female with a mean age of 78.93 ± 6.05 years. The data collection instrument consisted of an analysis grid that contains socio-demographic, clinical and therapeutic data. Descriptive statistics, and inferential analysis were estimated, the chi-square test of Pearson was used for p≤0.05. Data analysis found that individuals already presented with PU upon admission to the hospital, and that most of them stay between 6 days and 1 month; the longer the hospitalization period, the longer the hospitalization time, the greater the number of PU developed by individuals. Most PU patients have a strong prevalence of severe PU in the sacrum and calcaneus region, and hypertension, respiratory disease and Diabetes mellitus are the most frequent pathologies. The current gloomy picture of PUs can only be changed if there is greater investment in prevention and accurate treatment. In this sense, guidelines should be systematized for families during hospitalization and outpatient monitoring.
30137163 To investigate the prevalence of back pain and associated factors in children attending public schools from South Brazil. A cross-sectional study, conducted between May-July 2014, where a random sample of 619 adolescents, aged 10-17 years of age, was evaluated. The prevalence of back pain was assessed using the Nordic Musculoskeletal Questionnaire, and the independent variables (demographic and biological information, the way of transporting school supplies, and pain during and after the walk) were obtained through a standardized questionnaire. The Poisson regression model was used to estimate unadjusted and adjusted prevalence of back pain in association with the factors investigated. The prevalence of back pain was 45.2 %, out of which 64.6 % reported pain in one region, 27.1 % in two and 8.3 % in the three regions investigated. After an individual assessment of regions, it was found that the highest prevalence of pain relates to the dorsal region (26.2 %). The most relevant associated factors include female gender (OR=1.43, 95 %CI 1.19-1.74; p<0.01), age between 14 and 17 (OR=1.22; 95 %CI = 1.03-1.45; p=0.02), and dark skin (OR=1.20, 95 %CI 1.01-1.43; p=0.04). The results highlight the need for greater attention to adolescents complaining of back pain, in order to prevent the presence of this chronical disorder in adolescence and later in adulthood. Therefore, it is necessary to educate adolescents and their guardians for the stimulation and consequent adoption of healthy practices for musculoskeletal integrity.
30141825 to report the experience of the Division of Plastic Surgery of the Hospital das Clínicas of the Medical School of the University of São Paulo in the treatment of cutaneous lesions due to accidental extravasation of drugs. we included patients with lesions due to extravasation of drugs over a period of 18 months. We retrospectively evaluated the following parameters: age, diagnoses during hospitalization and comorbidities, serum levels of albumin and hemoglobin, place of hospitalization, drug involved, anatomic segment affected, therapeutic management and death during hospitalization. we followed-up 14 patients. The main drug involved was noradrenaline (21%). All patients underwent debridement of tissue necrosis. Three patients were submitted to flaps after preparation of the wound bed with negative pressure therapy, with good results. Seven patients had no definitive treatment of their lesions due to lack of clinical conditions. in patients with favorable clinical conditions, the definitive treatment with flaps was adequate for cases of wounds due to extravasation of drugs in the subcutaneous tissue when there was exposure of noble structures.
30142663 To evaluate the social, obstetric and psychological risk factors related to repeat pregnancy in teenagers.  A case control study conducted at Centro de Atenção à Saúde Integral da Mulher (Caism, in the Portuguese acronym), in Campinas, Brazil, from 2015 to 2017. Three groups were selected: a case-group of adolescents who had repeat pregnancy and two control-groups, one consisting of adolescents who had delivered at first time and another one of adult women with more than one deliveries. Participants were asked about habits, socio-demographics characteristics, reproductive and obstetric history and assessed psychological issues.  Ninety women were enrolled, 30 in each study group. Adolescents with repeat pregnancy have lower self-esteem scores and more ineffective contraceptive use. When compared with teens at first delivery, they had less schooling level (odds ratio [OR] 4.03 [1.37-11.8]), more school abandon (OR 8.16 [2.36-28.2]) and drugs use (OR 4.97[1.39-17.8]). Non-white skin color (OR 6.2 [1.15-41.0]), drugs use (OR 17.5 [2.62-116.6]) and first sexual intercourse under 15y (OR 18.0[2.82-115.0]) were found as higher risk factors for repeat pregnancy when comparing adolescents and adults. Moreover, adolescents with more than one gestation had lower self-esteem and greater susceptibility to unplanned pregnancy.  There was an association between repeat pregnancy among adolescents and lower education, early onset of sexual activity, non-white skin color, low use of contraception and increased use of drugs.
30142664 To identify maternal factors associated with the presence of low birth weight in term neonates.  Matched hospital-based case-controlled study performed in a high complexity institution located in the city of Neiva, Colombia. The study included women with term gestation and singleton live fetuses. Patients with prior diseases, coming from other regions, with pregnancy resulting from assisted reproduction, or with a diagnosis of fetal abnormality or aneuploidy were excluded. Low birth weight was the dependent variable, and the independent variables that were analyzed were maternal sociodemographic and clinical characteristics. Adjusted and non-adjusted odds ratios (aOR and OR) together with the 95% confidence intervals (95% CI) were reported.  The study included 270 participants (90 cases and 180 controls). Controlling for maternal age, educational level, socioeconomic and civil status, social security and the presence of maternal disease during gestation, it was found that weight gain (aOR 0.77, 95% CI 0.70-0.85) and the absence of prenatal care (aOR 8.20, 95% CI 3.22-20.87) were among the factors associated with low birth weight.  The absence of weight gain and of prenatal care are factors associated with the presence of low birth weight in term neonates and should be considered in clinical practice.
30142665 Intraoperative frozen section (IFS) is a valuable resource, and its use in gynecological pathology has not been sufficiently emphasized. The main goal of the present study is to evaluate the reliability and agreement rates between IFS and the final paraffin section (PS) and determine how reliable IFS is.  A retrospective study of all IFSs performed on uterine tumors and suspicious adnexal masses between January 2012 and December 2016 (excluding metastases) at the department of obstetrics and gynecology of the Centro Hospitalar Tondela Viseu. Frozen versus permanent section diagnosis were compared regarding the histologic type of the tumor, and the depth of myometrial invasion.  A total of 286 cases were eligible for the present study, including 102 (35.7%) IFSs of uterine tumors, and 184 (64.3%) IFSs of ovarian tumors. The overall rate of deferred cases was 5.2% (15/286). The accuracy of the diagnosis in cases of endometrial carcinoma was 96.25% (77/80). Among the ovarian tumors, misdiagnoses occurred in 2 cases (1.1%), corresponding to a borderline tumor (serous type) and a clear cell intracystic adenocarcinoma.  The IFS analysis plays an important role in selected situations and is associated to a high sensitivity and specificity in cases of ovarian and endometrial tumors. Its high accuracy is almost universally associated with the possibility of obtaining an optimal surgical treatment at the time of the first surgical approach.
30142666 To describe and evaluate the use of a simple, low-cost, and reproducible simulator for teaching the repair of obstetric anal sphincter injuries (OASIS).  Twenty resident doctors in obstetrics and gynecology and four obstetricians participated in the simulation. A fourth-degree tear model was created using low-cost materials (condom simulating the rectal mucosa, cotton tissue simulating the internal anal sphincter, and bovine meat simulating the external anal sphincter). The simulator was initially assembled with the aid of anatomical photos to study the anatomy and meaning of each component of the model. The laceration was created and repaired, using end-to-end or overlapping application techniques.  The model cost less than R$ 10.00 and was assembled without difficulty, which improved the knowledge of the participants of anatomy and physiology. The sutures of the layers (rectal mucosa, internal sphincter, and external sphincter) were performed in keeping with the surgical technique. All participants were satisfied with the simulation and felt it improved their knowledge and skills. Between 3 and 6 months after the training, 7 participants witnessed severe lacerations in their practice and reported that the simulation was useful for surgical correction.  The use of a simulator for repair training in OASIS is affordable (low-cost and easy to perform). The simulation seems to improve the knowledge and surgical skills necessary to repair severe lacerations. Further systematized studies should be performed for evaluation.
30142667 To compare surgical treatments for stress urinary incontinence in terms of efficiency and complications.  We searched the MEDLINE and COCHRANE databases using the terms <i>stress urinary incontinence</i>, <i>surgical treatment for stress urinary incontinence</i> and <i>sling</i>.  Forty-eight studies were selected, which amounted to a total of 6,881 patients with scores equal to or higher than 3 in the Jadad scale.  Each study was read by one of the authors, added to a standardized table and checked by a second author. We extracted data on intervention details, follow-up time, the results of treatment and adverse events.  Comparing retropubic versus transobturator slings, the former was superior for both objective (odds ratio [OR], 1.27; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.05-1.54) and subjective (OR, 1.23; 95% CI, 1.02-1.48) cures. Between minislings versus other slings, there was a difference favoring other slings for subjective cure (OR, 0.58; 95% CI, 0.39-0.86). Between pubovaginal sling versus Burch surgery, there was a difference for both objective (OR, 2.04; 95% CI, 1.50-2.77) and subjective (OR, 1.64; 95% CI, 1.10-2.44) cures, favoring pubovaginal sling. There was no difference in the groups: midurethral slings versus Burch, pubovaginal sling versus midurethral slings, transobturator slings, minislings versus other slings (objective cure). Retropubic and pubovaginal slings are more retentionist. Retropubic slings have more bladder perforation, and transobturator slings, more leg and groin pain, neurological lesion and vaginal perforation.  Pubovaginal slings are superior to Burch colposuspension surgery but exhibit more retention. Retropubic slings are superior to transobturator slings, with more adverse events. Other slings are superior to minislings in the subjective aspect. There was no difference in the comparisons between midurethral slings versus Burch colposuspension surgery, pubovaginal versus midurethral slings, and inside-out versus outside-in transobturator slings.
30146710 This case series describes three children with chronic lymphocytic inflammation with pontine perivascular enhancement responsive to steroids (CLIPPERS), an inflammatory condition characterized by a relapsing-remitting disease course responsive to steroids. The patients (two males, age 3y and 13y; one female, age 14y) presented with ataxia, dysarthria, and multiple cranial neuropathies. All patients demonstrated bilateral nodular lesions with contrast enhancement in the brainstem and cerebellum on magnetic resonance imaging, and perivascular lymphocytes and macrophages infiltrates on brain biopsies. Despite an initially good response to corticosteroids, all patients eventually became steroid-dependent or -resistant, with frequent relapses on maintenance immunosuppressive therapy. Natalizumab and intravenous immunoglobulin stopped neurological disease progression in Patient 1 but he died at 17 years from respiratory complications. Patient 2 went into remission on infliximab and intravenous methylprednisolone for several months but was then diagnosed with Epstein-Barr virus driven B-cell lymphoma 3 years after symptom onset. Patient 3 failed to respond to treatment and died 4 years after diagnosis. CLIPPERS disease in children is aggressive, with poor response to immunotherapy. Earlier use of newer immunotherapeutic agents such as natalizumab may be beneficial. Potential side effects need to be considered carefully. WHAT THIS PAPER ADDS: Paediatric chronic lymphocytic inflammation with pontine perivascular enhancement responsive to steroids (CLIPPERS) appears a more severe condition than previously reported in adults. Aggressive treatment before neuroaxonal loss may be required for a better outcome.
30146754 To evaluate the psychometric properties of the Child and Adolescent Intellectual Disability Screening Questionnaire (CAIDS-Q) in paediatric neurodevelopment clinics. Participants were 181 children (aged 6-18y) attending paediatric services in Scotland, divided into three age groups according to previous CAIDS-Q standardization cut-off scores. Fifty-four children (37 males, 17 females; mean age 117mo [SD 29.9mo]) met the criteria for intellectual disability and 127 did not (88 males, 39 females; mean age 120.1mo [SD 32.7mo]). A number of psychometric properties of the CAIDS-Q were evaluated, including test-retest and interrater reliability, convergent validity, sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative predictive values based on existing cut-off scores. Significant positive relationships were found for all three age groups between CAIDS-Q scores and measures of intellectual and adaptive functioning. Test-retest reliability ranged from 'moderate' to 'almost perfect', whereas interrater reliability ranged from 'fair' to 'almost perfect'. Sensitivity and positive predictive value were 100% for all groups and specificity was between 83% and 94%, depending on age. Negative predictive values ranged from 75% to 91%. The CAIDS-Q appears to show psychometric properties that support its use as a screen for intellectual disability in paediatric neurodevelopmental settings. The Child and Adolescent Intellectual Disability Screening Questionnaire showed good psychometric properties. It identified all participating children who met the criteria for intellectual disability. Between 83% and 94% of children without intellectual disability were also correctly identified.
30151900 Dodd's Model for Differential Diagnosis is one of the available clinical diagnostic classification systems of childhood speech sound disorders. Yet we do not understand the validity of this system beyond clinical samples, precluding its application in epidemiological or population-based research. This study aimed to determine the prevalence of subgroups of speech sound disorders in a community sample, relative to past clinical samples, in children speaking standard Australian English. We examined speech development in a community-ascertained sample of children at 4 years (n=1607). Inclusion for speech sound disorder was a score of less than or equal to 1 standard deviation on a standardized speech test, and/or research assistant concern, and/or three or more speech errors on sounds typically acquired by 4 years. Dodd's model was then applied to 126 children. Data revealed proportions of children across Dodd's diagnostic subgroups as follows: suspected atypical speech motor control (10%); inconsistent phonological disorder (15%); consistent atypical phonological disorder (20%); phonological delay (55%); and articulation disorder alone (0%). The findings are in line with known prevalence of these subgroups in clinical populations. Our findings provide additional support for speech-language pathologists to use this system in clinical practice for differential diagnosis and targeted intervention of speech sound disorders in children. Dodd's Model for Differential Diagnosis is the first classification system of speech sound disorders to be applicable to both clinical and community cohorts.
30156602 to evaluate the weight, nutritional and quality of life of low-income patients after ten years of Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB). we conducted a longitudinal, retrospective and descriptive study evaluating the excess weight loss, weight regain, arterial hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, anemia and hypoalbuminemia in 42 patients of social classes D and E submitted to RYGB. We assessed quality of life through the Bariatric Analysis and Reporting Outcome System (BAROS). of the 42 patients, 68.3% defined themselves as doing non-regular physical activity, and only 44.4% and 11.9% had regular medical and nutritional follow-up, respectively. We found a mean excess weight loss of 75.6%±12 (CI=71.9-79.4), and in only one patient there was insufficient weight loss. The mean weight loss was 22.3%±16.2 (CI=17.2-27.3) with 64.04% of the sample presenting regain greater than 15% of the minimum weight; 52.3% of the sample presented anemia after ten years of surgery and 47.6%, iron deficiency. We found hypoalbuminemia in 16.6% of the sample. There was remission of hypertension in 66%, and of type 2 diabetes mellitus, in 50%. BAROS showed an improvement in the quality of life of 85.8% of the patients. in a population with different socioeconomic limitations, RYGB maintained satisfactory results regarding weight loss, but inefficient follow-up may compromise the final result, especially with regard to nutritional deficiencies.
30156653 To assess the effect of the antibiotic Gentamicin in an experimental model in the presence of Diabetes Mellitus through renal function and oxidative profile. Adult male Wistar rats were distributed into groups: Citrate; Gentamicin (Genta), (intraperitoneal, i.p. gentamicin, 100 mg/kg of body weight, once a day,5 days); DM (60 mg/kg of STZ (Streptozotocin), single dose, intravenously, i.v., diluted in citrate buffer); and DM+Genta. Physiological parameters, renal function (creatinine clearance), oxidative damage (peroxides and thiobarbituric acid reactive substances - urinary TBARS) and renal hemodynamics were evaluated. The Diabetes Mellitus group presented chronic hyperglycemia associated with loss of body weight, polyphagia, polydipsia and polyuria, in addition to reduced renal function and with an increase in oxidative metabolite excretion. Administration of gentamicin induced a reduction in renal blood flow and increased renal vascular resistance in healthy rats. The association of Diabetes Mellitus with gentamicin resulted in an additional reduction in renal function and elevation of oxidative metabolites, with increased renal vascular resistance. The existence of Diabetes Mellitus resulted in an elevation of gentamicin nephrotoxicity, thus confirming the risk factor for drug nephrotoxicity.
30156654 To verify the effectiveness of aromatherapy with essential oils of lavender (Lavandula angustifolia) and geranium (Pelargonium graveolens) associated with massage for stress relief of a nursing staff of the surgical center through evaluation of biophysiological and psychological parameters. Pilot study, controlled and randomized clinical trial performed with the nursing team of a surgical center of a teaching hospital in the interior of the state of São Paulo. The intervention comprised six aromatherapy massages with essential oils diluted in neutral cream at concentration 1% each. Heart rate and blood pressure levels were measured before and after each massage session. The Work Stress Scale (WSS) and the List of Stress Symptoms (LSS) were applied before and at the end of the intervention. Statistical analysis was performed with the paired t-test and chi-square test, 95% confidence interval and p <0.05. There was a statistically significant reduction in heart rate and blood pressure levels after massage sessions. The use of aromatherapy has demonstrated effectiveness for lowering biophysiological parameters of the surgical center nursing staff. Brazilian Registry of Clinical Trials: RBR-6mgqn3.
30156655 To report the experience of implementing Home Visits as part of the Young Mothers Caregiver Program. The program focuses on the mother-child relationship as an object of care for developing parenting using the attachment theory, the self-efficacy theory and the bioecological theory as references. The construction of this program was centered on materials of international visitation programs, based on the translation of the material, elaboration and validation of the theoretical content. The home visits performed by the nurses lasted an average of 1 hour, where issues related to health care, environmental health, life project, parenting, family and social network, in addition to the adolescents' demands were discussed. It was shown that nurses encountered difficulties in implementing the program. By adopting Home Visits as a care tool with a focus on parenting, the experience of implementing the program proved to be an innovative technology, with great potential and relevance for promoting adolescent care and child development.
30156659 To analyze the trend of colorectal cancer mortality adjusted for selected indicators, according to sex, by Brazilian federative units and regions, and countrywide from 1996 to 2012. This is a temporal time series on colorectal cancer mortality rates, using linear regression analysis, in which the independent variable was the centered year. Models were adjusted for selected indicators. There was an increase in standardized colorectal cancer mortality rates for males in all states and for females in 21 states. In the model adjusted for mortality rate from ill-defined causes, for gross domestic product, and for Gini coefficient, the upward trend remained statistically significant (p < 0.05) countrywide only for men, with 0.17 deaths per 100 thousand inhabitants per year (py). In the States of Piauí (0.09 and 0.20 py), Ceará (0.17 and 0.19 py) and Rio Grande do Sul (0.61 and 0.42 py), there was an increase for both men and women, respectively; only among men in the States of Paraíba (0.16 py), Espírito Santo (0.28 py), São Paulo (0.24 py) and Goiás (0.31 py); and among women in Roraima (0.41 py), Amapá (0.97 P/Y), Maranhão (0.10 py), Sergipe (0.46 P/Y), Mato Grosso do Sul (0.47 py), and the Federal District (0.69 py). The increase in colorectal cancer mortality remained significant when assessing Brazil as a whole only among men; in seven States among men, and in nine States among women, regardless of the studied indicators. These differences could be related to the possible increase in incidence and to late access to diagnosis and treatment.
30156661 To estimate and describe the coverage of the Pap Smear test reported by women aged 25 to 64 years old from data collected by the National Health Survey (Pesquisa Nacional de Saúde - PNS) and to compare the estimates made by the Surveillance System for Risk and Protective Factors for Chronic Diseases using a Telephone Survey (Vigitel) for the same indicator in the Brazilian capital cities and the Federal District in 2013. Based on the data from the PNS and Vigitel, we estimated prevalence and 95% confidence intervals (95%CI) of women who reported having had a Pap test screening in the past 3 years. According to the PNS, 79.4% (95%CI 78.5 - 80.2) of the women had had a cervical cancer screening in the past 3 years in Brazil. Women aged 55 to 64 years old (71.0%, 95%CI 68.7 - 73.3) and without an education or incomplete elementary school (72.1%, 95%CI 70.6 - 73.7) had the lowest prevalence, and 88.4% (95%CI 87.5 - 89.2) received test results within 3 months. There was no difference when comparing the estimates of the Vigitel with the PNS for the capital city and Federal District totals. In the PNS, the prevalence was 83.8% (95%CI 82.8 - 84.7) and in the Vigitel, it was 82.9% (95%CI 81.9 - 83.8). In addition, there were no differences by capital, except for Recife, Boa Vista, and João Pessoa. Cervical cancer screening coverage for the target population is below the target of 85%. When comparing the data for the capital city and Federal District totals, we verified that the Vigitel System has been effective in monitoring this indicator, which is similar to PNS estimates.
30156662 Health Information Systems are potential instruments to analyze health situation; however, the non-compulsory filling of a single common field makes it difficult to link systems' data. This study aimed to describe and evaluate the adequacy of the strategies used to perform data linkage between databases from the Brazilian Public Health System (SUS) as to records for breast cancer control. The Breast Cancer Control Information Systems (SISMAMA), the Outpatient Information System (SIA, through Individualized Outpatient Service Production - BPA-I - and High-Complexity Outpatient Procedures Authorization Forms - APAC), the Hospital Information System (SIH), and the Mortality Information System (SIM) were linked probabilistically. The baseline was constructed by records with 'suspected' and 'highly suspected malignancy' from the second half of 2010. The linkage strategy included 15 steps. Registries with the national health service user card (CNS) or social security number (SSN) were used to estimate the sensitivity of the strategy, considering matches between records identified in the initial steps as gold standard, when these fields were used as key for blocking. Using CNS and the SSN as a linkage strategy allowed to identify the high proportion of true matches across databases in which these variables were inputted: 47.3% in follow-up mammography records, 41.4% in SIH, and 45.5% in APAC. The sensitivity of the linkage strategy was 100%. The study showed that the strategies were satisfactory and the use of CNS and SSN allowed many matches, even without critical proceedings and with the possibility of linkage between databases based on information from only a few identification fields.
30156663 We aimed to compare the sociodemographic, clinical and epidemiological characteristics of individuals under the age of 15, reported to have leprosy, and who lived in priority and non-priority cities, as well as to compare the spatial distribution of these reported cases in such cities. This is a cross-sectional study of new leprosy cases in individuals under the age of 15 (n=429) registered in the Information System for Notifiable Diseases from the State of Mato Grosso, Brazil, between 2011 and 2013. The diagnosed cases were compared regarding sociodemographic, clinical and epidemiological aspects using the chi-square test at a 5% significance level. The spatial distribution was made through ArcGIS 10.2 software. Of the 141 assessed cities in the state, according to the spatial distribution, 58.1% (n=82) showed a high, very high and hyper-endemic mean incidence coefficient, and, of these, 34.1% (n=28) include the group of priority municipalities. Of the new cases included in the study, 73.9% (n=317) were reported in priority cities. We observed a difference in the proportion of cases registered among the cities, with a greater proportion in priority cities, in the age group from five to nine years old (χ²=4.09; p=0.043), in the white race (χ²=7.01; p=0.008) and in the tuberculoid clinical form (χ²=3.89; p=0.048). There was a greater proportion in non-priority cases with regard to non-urban areas (χ²=24.23; p<0.001), two to five skin lesions (χ²=5.93; p=0.014) and spontaneous demand (χ²=6.16; p=0.013). The differences highlighted regarding clinical and epidemiological characteristics between the cities demonstrate the difficulty of endemic control in both municipality groups.
30684378 Multiple sclerosis typically affects young women of reproductive age. Therefore, all healthcare providers involved in the follow-up of multiple sclerosis patients must be prepared to discuss pregnancy and breastfeeding issues, and provide the best possible counselling. However, there are still many doubts and heterogeneous clinical approaches partly due to the lack of consensus and guidelines. Concerning the handling of disease modifying therapies during pregnancy and the postpartum period, uncertainties have been complicated by the increase in recent years of the number of available treatments. This article aims to present the state-of-the-art and provide guidance based on the best level of available evidence and expert opinion regarding the management of multiple sclerosis patients at different stages: pregnancy planning, pregnancy, partum, and the postpartum period.
31267521 To develop an assessment tool that measures a wide range of visual perceptual deficits common in cerebral visual impairment (CVI) and to provide normative data from typically developing children between 3 and 6 years of age. Test development reflected cross-talk between vision research and clinical relevance for CVI. The Children's Visual Impairment Test for 3- to 6-year-olds (CVIT 3-6) includes 14 subtests covering four domains of visual perception: Object Recognition, Degraded Object Recognition, Motion Perception, and Global-Local Processing. Normative data were collected from 301 typically developing children (mean age 4y 8mo [SD 9.7mo]; 148 females, 153 males). A questionnaire was administered to parents about pregnancy duration, birth, and developmental problems. Average total CVIT 3-6 performance was 60.1 (SD 5.5) out of 70. The cut-off score for normal visual perception (53) was set at the 10th centile of scores in typically developing children. Multiple regression indicated CVIT 3-6 visual perception scores increase with age for children born at 36 weeks' gestational age or later (β=-18.03, 95% confidence interval -31.31 to -4.75). CVIT 3-6 is a tool to assess a wide range of visual perceptual deficits common in CVI. Age-dependent normative data are available because we found performance increased with age. A test for visual perceptual deficits common in cerebral visual impairment. Visual perceptual functions improve with age in full-term typically developing children.
31269153 The analysis of health policy trajectories contributes to disclose the endogenous and exogenous elements that influence the management of health systems. This article aims to describe the trajectory of the Unified Health System of the Federal District (SUS-DF) from 1960 to 2018 and identify the challenges to expand the capacity for protection and health promotion of the population of the Federal District. A documentary analysis of plans, reports, and articles published from 1959 to 2018 and the collection of secondary data were carried out in databases of DATASUS and the Government of the Federal District. RESULTS The SUS-DF trajectory was delineated through care organization actions, health system management and health care personnel training and development. Health indicators such as infant mortality and life expectancy at birth have shown a positive development. There was an increase in health care servicesupply, with an increase in the number of beds, basic health units and professionals, although insufficient, given the population increase. CONCLUSION the actions indicate the growing complexity of health system management, with challenges related to the adaptation of the capacity to respond to the population'shealth needs and reveal internal potentials in the field of health training.
31269155 This paper aims to show a set of strategies and care management and organization actions that have been undertaken in what was conventionally called the Health Sector Reform of the Government of the Federal District in the period 2015-2018, which was based on the strengthening of primary health care, the organization of secondary care, the establishment of the health regulatory complex, the proposed regionalization and decentralization, the systematization of contracting and contractual implementation, and the proposal and establishment of a new management model for the main public hospital in Brasília.
31269160 This study examines the health situation in Brazil's Federal District between 2005 and 2017. A related set of indicators were selected and compared to those for Brazil's Midwest ('Centro-Oeste') region and for the country as a whole. First, data are presented on the demographic profile and current organizational structure of the health regions and administrative areas of the Federal District. The results show that infant mortality declined from 18.3% in 2006 to 10.3% (one of the lowest in rates in Brazil) in 2016. AIDS incidence in the Federal District declined 21.3% between 2006 and 2016, a positive result when compared to data for the Midwest region and Brazil. Tuberculosis incidence and mortality rates were among the lowest in Brazil between 2006 and 2016, well below the national average, as were those for Hansen's disease, where both annual incidence and incidence of grade 2 disability decreased significantly between 2007 and 2017. Congenital syphilis in under 1 year-olds has increased in recent years in Brazil and the Midwest, and also in the Federal District, where the rate was 2.56 per 1,000 live births in 2006 and 4.7 per 1,000 live births in in 2016. These data enable managers to identify trends and challenges to be met, and inform decision-making in response to health realities in the Federal District.
31269161 This article emphasizes PHC as a fundamental strategy for the sustainability of the SUS, based on its impact on health indicators. The attributes and requirements for Robust PHC are based on statements from researchers, policy makers and institutions, including the PAHO/WHO Representation in Brazil. The model proposed is the result of discussions with workers, researchers and health managers in Brazil, endorsing the commitments outlined in the Alma Ata Declaration. The article details the methodology of Health Innovation Laboratories used by PAHO/WHO in Brazil to systematize knowledge generated by innovative health experiences, including the Healthy Brasilia Project, an ongoing activity run by the Health Department of the Federal District (DF) of Brasilia, which has made important changes in the healthcare model, with emphasis on the expansion of Family Health Strategy coverage. This article analyzes the results of the Innovation Laboratories in Robust PHC in the FD that will be consolidated in a Case Study. The initiative aims to raise awareness amongst managers and health workers about innovation in health processes and policies that are essential for the sustainability of theSUS, focusing on the exchange of knowledge between peers about relevant initiatives in PHCin Brazil.
31269162 The Unified Health System has undergone constant evolution and expansion since the publication of Brazil's 1988 Federal Constitution. The Federal District has provided contributions to the field of Primary Health Care Policy, especially between 2016 and 2018, by defining the Family Health Strategy as the definitive way of organizing Primary Health Care (PHC) services and by establishing a set of actions aimed at conversion of existing PHC services to this model. This article describes and analyzes the key processes of this change. The method used was analysis of ordinances, resolutions, reports and other documents, as well as assessment of data from official databases. We emphasize the development of a normative structure that includes the teams' implementation, the professionals' work processes, changes in medical specialties and reorganization of the health professionals who already worked in PHC. with an effect of increasing the population's Family Health Strategy coverage (in a population of approximately 3 million inhabitants) from 28% to 69% during a two-year period, the experience demonstrates the feasibility of incremental changes in health policies such as defining priorities, better management of the workforce, training and decentralized planning to increase access to health services.
31269163 The integration among levels of care is a continuous challenge even in consolidated and high performance health systems. The reform of public health system of Distrito Federal, based on the strengthening of primary health care associated to the reconfiguration of specialized attention (ambulatory and hospital) and of its of urgency and emergence network brought, as a challenge, the need for integration between these levels. Thus, became necessary to create an instrumentto perform the role of gatekeeper, leading to equanimous, transparent and safe access to specialized and hospital care. Thus, the Regulatory Complex in Health of Distrito Federal (CRDF) and its Regulatory Centers (CR) were created to carry out the regulatory process of access to care services, such as hospitalization, ambulatory care (procedures and specialized consultations), elective surgeries, complex procedures, sanitary transport, urgencies and transplants of patients of the Federal District and outside it. This article describes the process of the CRDF implementation and its CRs, aiming to reflect on the potential and challenges of its role as an instrument of integration among the levels of care.
31269164 The public health network of the Federal District, as in the rest of the Brazilian Unified Health System, suffers from inefficiencies related to the difficulty in hiring and managing professionals, as well as the implementation of supply and maintenance contracts. In Brasilia, a new management model was implemented in 2018 in its largest hospital. With the creation of the autonomous social service 'Instituto Hospital de Base', a health unit in operation since 1960, the possibility of providing agility to these contracts was opened, in addition to establishing a management based on goals and outcome indicators, with expressive efficiency gains. This article reports the steps for the implementation of this decentralized model of hospital management, the alternatives considered, the difficulties faced and some of the first results of this new model. One can already verify and affirm the success of the legal-administrative model of 'Instituto Hospital de Base', which can serve as a paradigm for other health units in the Federal District and in Brazil.
31269165 The Social Participation in Health has been consolidated in the Unified Health System through the efforts of the Municipal, State, National Councils and Health Conferences. The division into municipalities isconstitutionally prohibited in the Federal District and, therefore, there is a District Health Council and the Regional Health Councils. The aim was to describe the profile of the Federal District Health Council, analyzing its actions in Primary Health Care from 2016 to 2018. This was a qualitative case study, with documentary collection using the Iramuteq software. A statistical report of the Health Council Monitoring System and public minutes of the Federal District Health Council were collected, dispensing with approval by the Ethics Committee. The Federal District Health Council is in agreement to what was stated in Resolution 453/2012 of the National Health Council. We analyzed 43 minutes, generating two categories and five classes. It was concluded that the Federal District Health Council originated the reform of Primary Health Care during the study period, through the publication of a resolution that established guidelines for the reorganization of the primary care level.
31269166 The National Policy for IntegralChildHealth Care (PNAISC), established by Ordinance GM/MS No. 1,130, of August 5, 2015, covers child health care under anintegral approach, and gathers actions in health care, promotion and prevention in seven strategic axes, across the different levels of care. The aim of this article is to report the development of health care in the Federal District, within the scope proposed by PNAISC and based on the guiding principles of the Unified Health System. The actions developed in each axis are described after the presentation of the assistance network of the Federal District State Health Secretariat (SHS/DF) and a brief history of child health care and its challenges, with the approach of the strategies developed for the establishment of a care network focused on integral child health care.
31269167 Through the creation of the Unified Health System (SUS), the planning processes gain intrinsic importance for the creation of public health policies and to subsidize decision-making, implementation of actions and the achievement of results. Since planning tools are fundamental to guidethe management, caution is needed regarding the interface between them,aiming at achieving the integration of health services, of which results are better, more effective and cost-effective for the government. Likewise, continuous monitoring and evaluation (M&E) processes allow the measurement and tracking of strategic information, improving the quality of health information systems and health indicators, as well as the operational and organizational performance. In this article, we present the recent initiative to implement the M&E System in the State Health Secretariat of the Federal District (SHS/DF) and the processes involved in its qualification.
31269169 This study compared standardised rates of hospitalisations due to ambulatory care sensitive conditions (ACSCs) in Brazil's Federal District from 2009 to 2018, as compared with those for selected state capitals, age groups and admissions groups. This ecological study used secondary data drawn from Hospital Information System microdata for the study period, during which, in the Federal District, the proportion of such admissions among 50-59 and 60-69 year olds declined, while those among children and adolescents held stable. Meanwhile, rates did not decrease in the ≤ 20 year age groups, a priority population in PHC, which may suggest that this population encountered barriers to access. The results showed that the expected reduction in the proportion of such admissions has not occurred, because coverage by Family Health Teams has been expanded only recently.
31269170 This article reports on the experience of implementing Health Care Planning (HCP) in the territories of Itapoã, Paranoá and São Sebastião in the East Region of Brazil's Federal District. HCP began at the end of 2016 with Itapoã and was expanded to the other territories in 2018. The results point to a better organised health care network, specifically as regards care for chronic conditions, hypertension and diabetes. The activities involved a series of thematic theory workshops and tutoring workshops carried out in Primary Health Care (PHC) and Specialised Ambulatory Care (SAC) facilities. In PHC, macro-processes (territorialisation, family registration, risk stratification, family risk classification, local diagnosis, care by block of hours, elimination of waiting times, and others) were organised to support meeting certain of the population's demands. In SAC, an Ambulatory Specialities Clinic was set up using the technology of continuous care provided by a multi-professional team to high- and very high-risk hypertensive and diabetic patients stratified in PHC, and care provision is shared. One of the strong points in the integration of PHC and SAC was matrix support provided by SAC professionals in 'laboratory units'. HCP has been an important management tool for organising health care in the East Region.
31269171 Secondary Outpatient Care (SOC) is a subject seldom studied in the literature, but of great importance for the strengthening of Primary Health Care (PHC) and the structuring of the Health Care Network. After the increase of PHC coverage following the Family Health Strategy (FHS) model, through the 'CONVERTE APS' project, the State Health Secretariat of the Federal District (SHS-DF) identified the need to organize this level of care throughout the Federal District. SHS-DF has, as its Health Care Planning basis, the knowledge experienced in one of its regions, in addition to the theoretical framework produced and systematized by the National Council of Health Secretariats (CONASS) in recent years, as well as successful experiences in other regions of Brazil and countries with public health systems. The strategies to be used include the following: diagnosis and organization of facility structures, creation of a regional managerial level for Secondary Care, personnel sizing, development of the legal framework for level of care regulation, creation of technical milestones, regulation of medical and non-medical consultations in health regions and matrix support as an education strategy, but also of connection between levels of care.
31269172 To assess adherence to best practices in labor and childbirth care by doctors, nurses, obstetric nursing residents, and obstetric medical residents working in public hospitals in the Federal District of Brazil. A cross-sectional study was conducted with care providers working in 11 public hospitals in the Federal District of Brazil between January and March 2015. A questionnaire containing 20 sociodemographic questions and 50 five-point Likert items was administered. The average scores of each group and each hospital were analyzed. Nurses obtained the highest scores for the use of evidence-based practices (57.8 ± 12.9), while doctors achieved the highest scores for the work process dimension (72 ± 8.5). Medical residents obtained the highest scores for organization of labor and childbirth care (56.5 ± 8.5). No statistically significant differences were found between groups. Hospital scores ranged from 55 to 64. No statistically significant differences were found between hospitals. Most professionals encourage natural childbirth. It is necessary to strengthen actions to promote greater adherence to best care practices, both in relation to organization of labor and childbirth care and to the attitudes and values of health professionals.
31269173 Since its creation in 1988, major changes have been made to Brazil's public health system in response to the epidemiological transition and the country's changing economic context and demographics. This article describes the recent healthcare reform implemented in the federal district's public hospital system. Guided by evidence-based management and a series of regulatory instruments, the reform organized hospital emergency services and secondary outpatient care, regulated health services, and remodeled the organizational structure of the Department of Health. These changes were aimed at promoting integration between health professionals across different levels of care and ensuring the provision of continuing comprehensive care. This approach guarantees efficiency gains in patient treatment, since multifocal and focal professionals work in an integrated manner. By reorganizing work processes and ensuring adequate planning, it was possible to redesign the care model to promote knowledge management and improve access to information and interactivity, thus helping to ensure the provision of quality, value-added care.
31269174 The Oral Health Policy of the Federal District State Health Secretariat was in a fragmented state, similarly to the entire health system. There was no integration between oral health teams and other Primary Care professionals and performance at the other levels was inconsistent and limited, preventing the effective establishment of the Care Network. In 2017, the head management chose to convert the system organically based on the family health strategy and the logic of the care networks. The aim of this study is to report on the main actions carried out so that oral health care would conform to the changes, developing into the construction of the specific Care Line in the area, allowing increased access and qualification of care .
31269175 This paper presents the issue of judicialization of the right to health in Brazil. Data from the National Council of Justice evidence a substantial increase in the number of lawsuits concerning the right to health. We emphasize that the national doctrine exhaustively discusses ways to make the authority more effective, but it does not, as a general rule, discuss the economic aspect of health judicialization. Using the concept of opportunity cost extracted from economics science, it is shown that the judge, by deferring the lawsuit formulated by the plaintiff, automatically forces the Executive Branch to reduce the scope of other policies to generate resources to meet the court order. In specific contexts, this setting ends up favoring individual rights at the expense of the collective rights of SUS users, in violation of the principle of isonomy and efficiency. Finally, the case of the judicialization promoted by the hemophiliac patients in the Federal District is shown as a way of evidencing, at the factual level, the consequences of judicialization in the SUS policies.
31269176 Primary health centers (PHCs) should consider the demographic and epidemiological profile of the health region to respond to population aging and structure service delivery around networks based on macro and micro-level management to ensure the provision of comprehensive services. A normative evaluation of micro-level management in four PHCs in a health region in the Federal District of Brazil was conducted to inform the development of recommendations for enhancing the delivery of comprehensive and integrated long-term care for older persons. A management evaluation matrix was used where management stages were classified as advanced, intermediate and incipient. The findings show that none of the PHCs were at the advanced stage, three were at the intermediate stage, and one at the incipient stage. The lowest scores were obtained for the subdimensions care model (which was shown to be predominantly traditional) and humanization (fragmentation of care). Lack of infrastructure and staff absenteeism were shown to be constraining factors, while effective communication with local administrators was as facilitating factor. Improvements need to be made in micro-level management to enhance the delivery of comprehensive and timely care to older persons in this health region.
31269177 Based on Brazil's commitment to the fulfillment of the Agenda 2030 and its 17 Sustainable Development goals (ODS), the State Secretariat for health of the Federal District, sought partnerships to address the ODS 3-Health and welfare 'securing healthy and promote welfare for all, at all ages'. Because it is an ODS that permeates all others, governmental actions directed to health and well-being are of extreme relevance to the success in the implementation of Agenda 2030. In this article we present the initiatives for the activation of social networks in the locality called the Estrutural city, in the Federal District, as a strategy for measuring health determinants, the implementation of a monitoring approach and cooperative evaluation of risk situations and social and environmental vulnerability of the territory, having the prospect of making it healthy and sustainable from the reference of the new local production process and the Agenda 2030 of the development goals sustainable.
31269178 This paper describes the experience of the School for the Improvement of the Unified Health System in the Federal District of Brazil (EAPSUS, acronym in Portuguese), which, together with the Superior School of Health Sciences and Technical School of Health of Brasília, is maintained by the Health Sciences Teaching and Research Foundation (FEPECS, acronym in Portuguese). This group of schools works jointly to provide health education in the Federal District. EAPSUS is responsible for the education of staff at the Department of Health of the Federal District of Brazil, using Pedagogy of Problematization as its theoretical frame of reference. It seeks to tailor teaching and learning to the needs of health services, building health professionals' capacity to examine practice reflectively and construct alternative actions. EAPSUS adopts a unique approach as a government school, developing contextualized educational actions. Education is a key component of an ambitious design that aligns concepts, guiding principles, and instruments with the strategic planning of the centers and the Federal District Health Plan. FEPECS conforms to the logic of a public health school, given that it provides higher education, professional education, and promotes the professional development of SUS staff and administrators in the Federal District.
31269179 Stricto sensu postgraduate courses were regulated to enhance the training of university professors and researchers in order to attend the expansion of higher education and promote scientific research development. Today, Brazilian postgraduate programs transcend the academic limits, especially after the establishment of professional masters and doctorate programs. This is a documentary study, which included ESCS management reports, as well as bibliographic and technical productions. The ESCS currently provides three postgraduate programs: Professional Masters in Health Sciences, Academic Masters in Health Sciences, and Professional Masters in Family Health (ProfSaúde). The ESCS experience is an effort to integrate teaching, research and health care in which we should highlight the concern with the development of the interface with public health policies. However, the institutional environment is complex because ESCS is a higher education institution linked to a State Health Secretariat, which supports the full development of the critical, creative and humanistic potential of professors and students. However, this challenges the scientific consistency and disruptive nature of their products and processes.
31269180 This article analyzes the profile of research conducted in the Federal District of Brazil funded through public calls for proposals issued by the Research for the SUS Program: shared health management/Federal District (PPSUS/DF) and a research support program run by the Superior School of Health Sciences, maintained by the Health Sciences Teaching and Research Foundation (ESCS/FEPECS, acronym in Portuguese). A document analysis was undertaken of all research funded by the PPSUS/DF and ESCS/FEPECS's Research Support Program between 2008 and 2017 using the following variables: year, title, research themes of the National Agenda for Health Research Priorities (ANPPS, acronym in Portuguese), implementing organization, area of application of research, and amount of funding. PPSUS/DF funded 73 projects with a total investment of approximately R$8 million, while ESCS/FEPECS funded 85 projects with a total investment of R$2.3 million. This study provides a critical analysis of the research themes supported by ESCS/FEPECS and PPSUS/DF between 2008 and 2017. It is recommended that future calls for proposals should prioritize the three leading causes of death in the Federal District and the organization and evaluation of healthcare services.
31269181 The history of Primary Health Care (PHC) in the Federal District (DF) is as old as the history of the Federative Unit. The history of Family and Community Medicine (MFC), however, is relatively recent, both locally and nationally. This paper proposes to focus on the fundamental contribution of MFC to advances in Public Health in the Federal District, especially in the last 10 years, after the founding of the Family and Community Medicine Association of Brasília (ABMFC). In order to do so, the most relevant historical events and contexts related to Health Care, Management, Social Control and Medical Education - including Undergraduate course and Residency - were documented, which support this position, in parallel with the evolution of the specialty in the Federal District. Therefore, its organization was divided into four historical stages: until 2008, from 2008 to 2011, from 2011 to 2016, and from 2016 to 2018.
31269182 The 'Bolsa Família' Program (BFP) is an income transfer program based on meeting certain conditions, being Brazil's main strategy for combating extreme poverty, hunger and social inequality. To satisfy the educational criteria, the offspring of the beneficiary families must attend school and score minimum school attendance rates. The aim of this study was to conduct a systematic review to assess the outcomes (effects and impact) of the BFP on educational indicators among the beneficiary families. A search was conducted in the Medline, Lilacs, EBSCO, Econstor, Science Direct and Web of Knowledge databases and the methodological quality of the articles included was evaluated using the Downs & Black checklist. Of the 2,391 studies identified, only 12 were selected. There was evidence that BFP had positive outcomes on educational indicators for the female gender and for the Northern region of Brazil. The results showed that BFP has no impact on academic proficiency and performance, but has a significant impact on school attendance and dropout rates.
31269184 A systematic review of the literature on analytical epidemiologic studies about factors associated with the use of health services by elderly men was conducted. Four databases were researched, namely PubMed, Scopus, Web of Science and Lilacs and the following key words 'health services,' 'health services for the aged,' 'aged,' 'aged 80 and over,' 'men' and 'men's health' and their corresponding expressions in Portuguese were used. After independent reading and selection of the abstracts and full texts of the 1782 articles located, only eight were included in this review. The Health Services Utilization model assisted in the presentation of the results. Predisposing factors associated with regard to the use of the healthcare services were identified: place of residence; lifestyle habits; age bracket; family history; education and marital status; training factors: private health services use and affiliation to a health insurance plan; effective factors of need; perception of health status; perceived susceptibility to stress; medical history; comorbidities; and functional status. The issue of aging among the male population is still poorly studied and deserves special attention to establish how elderly men express their needs and how they are being assisted by healthcare systems.
31269185 The profile of pediatric care has gone through changes in Brazil and in the world. This process becomes more visible in surveys that deal with hospital admission or specialized outpatient care data. This fact leads us to the idea that it is in such spaces that these children and subjects who care for them are more visible and negotiate decisions. We aim to perform a state of the art literature review on decision making discussions and definitions, analyzing the current research in light of the theoretical Mol perspectives on the actors' logics of chronic diseases care; And the perspective of care goods exchanges in the dialogue between Martins and Moreira, triggering the Theory of Gift. The synthesis of the literature shows that decision making may be understood as a care planning process in which family, patients and health professionals are involved, and is linked to the family-centered care model. In terms of difficulties, we point out the prevalence of a dynamic that favors a criticizable choice because of the risks of inequality, such as the lack of discussion on the options and the actuation of the family mostly in times of difficult decisions.
31269186 The eating habits of pregnant women are influenced by several factors, and it is essential to understand them in order to establish nutritional interventions in prenatal care. The objective of this integrative review was to analyze the bibliographic production on the eating habits of pregnant Brazilian women. A search was conducted in the Biblioteca Virtual em Saúde (BVS), PubMed, Scopus, Web of Science and Scientific Electronic Library Online databases (SciELO) using the following key words: 'Gestantes' or 'Grávidas' and 'Hábitos Alimentares' in Portuguese, and 'Pregnant women' and 'Eating habits' and 'Brazil' in English. After the adoption of inclusion and exclusion criteria, 18 studies were analyzed. Some studies targeted specific populations such as adolescents or non-obese pregnant women. The Food Frequency Questionnaire was the instrument most often used to investigate food consumption among pregnant women. The majority of the studies revealed that the diet of pregnant women needs improvement, especially due to the low consumption of fruit, greens and vegetables, and the high consumption of sugar, sweets and fats. Most studies concluded and reinforced the importance and need for nutritional education by prenatal professionals. More studies are needed to better understand these eating habits.
31269187 The scope of this article is to identify a specific method of nutritional screening for use on elderly Brazilians living at home. It is a systematic review article using the PubMed, LILACS and Web of Science databases. The eligibility criterion was articles about nutritional screening methods for the elderly. The articles were read by evaluators who selected the methods and classified them according to evidence of validity, reproducibility and acceptability. EndNote software was used for scrutiny of the articles. Twelve methods of nutritional screening were identified, 3 being developed for use in the US population (n = 4), though none for the Brazilian population. In seven methods, the forms were filled out by the elderly themselves, and 4 of these presented anthropometric measures. Only one method produced information on acceptability. Reproducibility and validity was identified in 1 and 8, respectively, however only the Determine Your Nutritional Health® - DNH method presented acceptability data, which is a fundamental aspect in the choice for adaptation and use of the method in another country. Among the methods studied, the DNH was the most appropriate for cross-cultural adaptation and use on elderly Brazilians living at home.
31269188 To investigate the association between dementia and anthropometric indicators in the elderly from Florianópolis. This is a cross-sectional population-based survey performed with 1,197 elderly (≥ 60 years) in 2013/2014. Dementia was deﬁned as the combined evidence of low MMSE (Mini-Mental State Examination) score and moderate/severe disability in the activities of daily living. The independent variables were body mass index (BMI), waist circumference (WC), conicity index and waist-to-height ratio (WHtR). Logistic regression (crude and adjusted) was performed to identify associated factors. Dementia prevalence was estimated at 15.1%. After adjustment for sociodemographic characteristics, lifestyle and depressive symptoms, dementia was positively associated with the upper tertiles of the BMI (OR: 2.32; CI95%: 1.26-4.25), WC (OR: 2.22; CI95%: 1.20-4.11) and WHtR (OR: 2.30; CI95%: 1.19-4.43). Results have shown that both obesity and abdominal fat were associated with the outcome, suggesting that BMI, WC and WHtR should be considered in the investigation of this relationship.
31269192 The prevalence of gestational breast cancer (GBC) is 1:3,000-10,000 pregnancies. This study aims to identify the risk factors associated with GBC. This case-control study was conducted in the period between January 2004 and December 2014 at a reference maternity hospital for high-risk pregnancies in Rio de Janeiro. Two controls were selected for each case, totaling 21 GBC cases and 42 controls. Data were collected through a review of medical and hospitalization and delivery records. Reproductive, obstetrical, sociodemographic and health-related characteristics were investigated. Results: The mean age of pregnant women in both groups was 35.5 years. Menarche's mean age was also similar (12.3 years) in both groups. Mother's age at first pregnancy was > 30 years in 28.6% of the patients with GBC and in 2.4% of the control group (p = 0.03). Crude and adjusted odds ratio and their respective CI 95% were calculated through conditional logistic regression paired by mother's age. The results show that the risk for GBC increases 27% for each additional year of mother's age at first pregnancy (p < 0.02) and that mothers with lower schooling had higher risk of GBC (OR = 8.49). Conclusion: Our data confirm the association of primiparity over 30 years of age and low level of schooling with GBC.
31271577 The present study aimed to analyze the degree of implementation of the national health care policy at the state level. This qualitative evaluation study was carried out in two stages. Firstly, the policy was modelled by means of document analysis and the application of the Delphi technique for consensus among experts. In the second stage, a qualitative, exploratory evaluative research was conducted, designed as a single case study in a Brazilian state through semi-structured interviews with health managers. The experts reached a consensus for a logical model and an evaluation matrix of the policy implementation. The results at the state level evinced an incipient degree of implementation, as the level of government characteristics achieved 45% of the maximum score; management, 41%; and system organization, 33%. The degree of implementation in the state evaluated was classified as incipient. Barriers were identified in the management and organization levels of the system, as well as in the political context.
31271578 The objective of this study was to verify the immediate effect of sensory and motor neuromuscular electrical stimulation (NMES), in the oral and pharyngeal phases of deglutition, in a 64 year male patient after laryngeal cancer treatment. Videofluoroscopy was performed during deglutition of 5 ml of honey and pudding, under three conditions: without stimulation, with sensory NMES, with motor NMES, randomly defined. The degree of dysfunction of deglutition (DOSS), the presence of food stasis (Eisenhuber scale), laryngeal penetration and laryngotracheal aspiration (PAS) and oral and pharyngeal transit time were evaluated. An evaluator without knowing about the applied stimulus. On the DOSS scale there was improvement with sensory and motor stimulation. In the PAS scale, there was improvement, both for the sensorial and motor stimulus in the honey consistency, but the worsening of the motor stimulus for the pudding consistency was observed. There was reduction of the residues in the base of the tongue with sensorial and motor stimulus for the consistency of pudding and honey; worsening motor stimulus in the posterior wall of the pharynx for honey consistency. There was no difference between stimulation levels regarding to oral and pharyngeal transit time. The results showed that NMES at the sensory and motor levels improved the degree of dysphagia in an individual after the treatment of laryngeal cancer, with greater benefits of the sensory level in relation to the motor regarding to the presence of penetration and residues.
31271579 to analyze the occurrence of psychiatric diagnosis and the use of psychotropics medications in subjects with vestibular complaints and to relate the presence of these conditions to the results of vestibulometry. quantitative, observational, cross-sectional study with 131 patients, treated in a university hospital. They were submitted to anamnesis, visual inspection of the external ear canal, static and dynamic balance tests, Foam laser dynamic posturography and Computerized Vectoelectronystagmography. sample composed of 109 women and 22 men, with average age of 55 years and nine months. The most common type of dizziness was vertigo, with the presence of neurovegetative signals. A significant percentage of psychiatric complaint/diagnosis was observed, as well as the use of psychotropic medications, mainly serotonin uptake inhibitors, followed by benzodiazepines. There was a relation between the presence of psychiatric complaints with the female gender, alterations of the static balance and alterations in the Sensorial Organization Test positions III and VI. In the Vectoelectronystagmography, there was a relation between age and the presence of spontaneous nystagmus. There was a high occurrence of psychiatric complaint/diagnosis among patients with dizziness, with use of psychotropic medications substantially greater than the general population. The evaluation of postural balance revealed an association between anxiety/depression and alterations visual overload positions in the foam laser dynamic posturography. However, no relationship was found between these conditions and alterations in the Vectoelectronystagmography tests.
31271581 To verify the effect of the multiple exemplar instruction at the acquisition and integration of listening and speaking behaviors, with substantives and substantive-adjective combinations, in children with Auditory Neuropathy Spectrum Disorder (ANSD) and cochlear implant (CI). Participants were two children with ANSD that were users of CI. We adopted dictated stimulus and pictures that corresponded to words (substantive) and substantive-adjective syntactic units. The study was arranged in teaching steps that were intercalated with listening and speaking behaviors probes, with all stimuli. The multiple exemplar instruction presented oral imitation (echoic), auditory recognition (listening) and pictures naming (touch) tasks, on a rotating way; the substantives were taught first and, after that, the substantive-adjective combinations. In the pre-test, the participants showed variability and discrepancy in the correct responses percentages of listening and speaking. All achieved firstly 100% correct responses in the listening task and the speaking performances were close to listening after the teaching. All extended substantive learning to substantive-adjective syntactic units. Children with ANSD and CI can learn and integrate listening and speaking behaviors by multiple exemplar instruction, from words to syntactic units.
31271582 To verify the relation between the self-reported shyness and perceived vocal handicap in teachers from Early childhood and Primary education (elementary and middle school). 200 teachers (mean age 41.8 years old) without vocal complaint answered to personal identification protocol, work characterization information, the Vocal Handcap Index and the Shyness Scale. From the total sample, 142 (71%) teachers had no vocal disadvantage, 42% (n = 59) were shy and 58% (n = 83) were non-shy. Among the 58 (29%) teachers with vocal disadvantage, most of them were shy (64%) instead of non-shy (26%). Considering the shy teachers, most of them worked in Early Childhood Education, were aged between 20-30 years old, had from 1 to 10 years of teaching experience and were working in a noisy classroom. The presence of upper airway affections was more frequent in shy teachers without vocal disadvantage and this was the only aspect that differentiated shy and non-shy teachers. Shy teachers showed higher frequency of vocal disadvantage when compared to non-shy teachers. Teachers between 20 and 30 years old, with up to 10 years of teaching experience and who teach in Early Childhood Education reported shyness, but there was no relation with vocal disadvantage.
31271584 to verify the applications of AAT in health by performing a systematic review of the literature. a survey was carried out in four databases with the descriptors: animal assisted therapy, horse assisted therapy, speech therapy. article published between 2010 and 2018, in Portuguese or English, free electronic access and that mentioned the characteristics of the intervention program. criteria: casuistry, area of knowledge, program characteristic, type of research, year and language of publication, nationality, periodical and impact factor. 43 articles published in 30 journals, 16 with impact factor, were reviewed. Clinical studies prevailed (93.02%), 37.20% were from Medicine, the population studied had different diagnoses and ages, 55.81% with adults / elderly. AAT was used preferentially for physical rehabilitation (67.44%) and the main mediator was the dog, mentioned in 72.09% of the articles. Eight (n = 8) programs with a focus on communication intervention were described. There is scientific evidence on the use of AAT published in the period studied, in Brazil and in the world. The programs were used by different health and education professionals. The AAT goals were specific to the profile of the participants, and consistent with the characteristics of the mediator animal and the site.
31271627 The fluid resuscitation of patients with acute circulatory failure aims to increase systolic volume and consequently improve cardiac output for better tissue oxygenation. However, this effect does not always occur because approximately half of patients do not respond to fluids. The evaluation of fluid responsiveness before their administration may help to identify patients who would benefit from fluid resuscitation and avoid the risk of fluid overload in the others. The dynamic parameters of fluid responsiveness evaluation are promising predictive factors. Of these, the echocardiographic measurement of the respiratory variation in the inferior vena cava diameter is easy to apply and has been used in the hemodynamic evaluation of intensive care unit patients. However, the applicability of this technique has many limitations, and the present studies are heterogeneous and inconsistent across specific groups of patients. We review the use of the inferior vena cava diameter respiratory variation, measured via transthoracic echocardiography, to decide whether to administer fluids to patients with acute circulatory failure in the intensive care unit. We explore the benefits and limitations of this technique, its current use, and the existing evidence.
31271628 Rituximab safety and efficacy in patients with renal impairment have not been established, nor have the effects of hemodialysis on serum rituximab level. There are only a few published case reports assessing serum rituximab level pre- and postdialysis. No data have been published regarding the usage of rituximab in patients with continuous renal replacement therapy. The authors present a case of a 59-year-old female patient who presented with paraneoplastic tetraparesis. She was admitted to the intensive care unit due to alveolar hemorrhage with respiratory failure and acute kidney injury requiring continuous renal replacement therapy. After a diagnostic workup, the diagnosis of lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma was established. Therapy with rituximab and cyclophosphamide was started. Rituximab levels were determined in serum and dialysate. No rituximab was found in the dialysate. The patient died after 2 months in the intensive care unit from nosocomial pneumonia due to multidrug-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
31271630 to describe maternal deaths and deaths of women of childbearing age in the indigenous population in the state of Pernambuco, Brazil, from 2006 to 2012. this is a descriptive study based on linkage of data from the Mortality Information System (SIM) and its investigation module (SIM-Web); causes of death were considered in accordance with the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Health Related Problems - 10th Revision (ICD-10). linkage provided a database comprised of 115 records, of which only 58.3% were recorded on SIM as indigenous; the main causes of death were diseases of the circulatory system (27.0%), external causes (14.8%), neoplasms (13.0%), and maternal factors (8.7%). deaths of indigenous women of childbearing age were underreported; the main cause of these deaths were diseases of the circulatory system, although maternal deaths still represent an important cause of death in the population studied.
31271631 to evaluate the implementation of the Results Control, Monitoring and Evaluation System (e-Car) at the Health Surveillance Secretariat (SVS), Brazilian Ministry of Health, in the period 2012-2015. this was an evaluation study using mixed methods for collection of primary and secondary data, followed by definition of the system's degree of implementation and analysis of the influence of the political-organizational context. the e-Car System was considered to have been implemented (75.4%) at SVS; the worst scores for its structure dimension related to the computer and operating system maintenance service, as well as little knowledge of the system manual; as for the system's process dimension, the existence of collegiate bodies was considered beneficial for monitoring. the e-Car System had been implemented at SVS; however, its sustainability was fragile, and SVS was recommended to institutionalize and strengthen its monitoring and evaluation practices.
31271632 The Special Tuberculosis Treatment Information System (SITE-TB) arose mainly from the need to routinely monitor all persons with drug-resistant tuberculosis (DR-TB) in Brazil, as well as to qualify tuberculosis' drug control. Developed by the Professor Hélio Fraga Reference Center and the Management Sciences for Health/Brazil Project, this online system was implemented in 2013 in all Brazilian states. In addition to DR-TB, the system registers people with drug-sensitive tuberculosis with special regimen indications, and those with nontuberculous mycobacterial infections identified by differential diagnosis of tuberculosis. All confirmed tuberculosis cases should be notified on the Notifiable Diseases Information System (SINAN). In situations where treatment with special regimens is necessary, the case is closed on SINAN and notified on SITE-TB. Professionals from tuberculosis reference centers report and monitor these cases on the system, as well as manage tuberculosis' drugs.
31271633 to identify the practice of bullying reported by Brazilian students, according to sex, age and geographical location. this was a cross-sectional study based on two national samples from the National School Health Survey (PeNSE), 2015; a total of 102,301 students participated in the study forming a nationally representative sample; data were collected through a self-administered questionnaire. bullying prevalence was 19.8% (95%CI - 19.2;20.3), with higher prevalence in the Southeast region of the country (22.2% - 95%CI 21.1;23.4), and in the State of São Paulo (24.2% - 95%CI 22.3;26.2), however the city with the highest prevalence was Boa Vista (25.5% - 95%CI 22.9;28.1), capital of the State of Roraima; boys (24.2% - 95%CI 23.4;25.0) practiced more bullying than girls (15.6% - 95%CI 14.9;16.2), as did younger students aged 13 to 15 years (22.0% - 95%CI 20.4;23.6). higher rates of reported bullying practices were found among adolescents from the Southeast region, among male and younger students.
31271635 to describe the epidemiological profile of human rabies in Brazil. this is a descriptive study of human rabies cases reported in 2000-2017, with an estimate of incidence and spatial distribution. 188 cases were studied, mostly males (66.5%), rural residents (67.0%), children under 15 years (49.6%), with biting being the most frequent form of exposure (81.9%); frequency was highest in the period 2000-2008 (85.6%), with 46.6% of cases involving dogs and 45.9% bats; median incubation was 50 days, followed by, predominantly, symptoms of fever (92.6%), agitation (85.2%), paresthesia (66.7%), and dysphagia/paralysis (51.9%); the majority (70.2%) did not have prophylaxis and for the rest (29.8%) who did have prophylaxis, it was untimely and/or incomplete; 13 patients were treated according to the Recife Protocol, and two survived. human rabies incidence reduced and its epidemiological profile changed, with predominance of cases transmitted by bats; we suggest that secondary cases be investigated, and that pre-exposure prophylaxis be made available to populations at greater risk of accidents involving bats.
31271636 to describe reported health promotion actions directed towards chronic non-communicable disease (CNCD) patients, the support of physical education professionals (PEP) and the implementation of actions to promote body practices and physical activity (BPPA) by the Family Health Support Center (FHSC) teams, according to Brazilian municipality context variables. this was a cross-sectional study, forming part of the 2013/2014 National Primary Health Care Access and Quality Improvement Program (PMAQ), by means of interviews with FHSC professionals. the action most reported by the teams was evaluation and rehabilitation of psychosocial conditions (90.8%); promotion of BPPA was the sixth most performed action, and was more prevalent in the Brazilian Southeast region (89.6%), in medium-sized municipalities (88.7%), with medium human development index (HDI) (86.7%); PEP provided support to 87% of the teams. FHSC were found to make an important contribution to BPPA.
31271637 to estimate the incremental budget impact of target therapy for first-line treatment of advanced non-surgical and metastatic melanoma compared to dacarbazine treatment. budget impact analysis, from the Brazilian National Health System (SUS) perspective; based on demographic data and incidence estimates, the population over a three-year time horizon (2018-2020) was delimited and the direct medical costs were estimated; the reference scenario was treatment with dacarbazine, and the alternative scenarios were target therapy with vemurafenib, dabrafenib, vemurafenib + cobimetinib and dabrafenib + trametinib; uncertainty assessment was conducted through scenario analysis. the incremental budget impact ranged from R$ 451,867,881.00 to R$ 768,860,968.00, representing 0.70 to 1.53% of total SUS annual outpatient drugs expenditure; in best and worst scenario, results ranged from R$ 289,160,835.00 to R$ 1,107,081,926.00. the use of target therapy compared to dacarbazine implies an excessive impact on the budget, this bring unfovorable to its possible incorporation.
31273776 This study aims to identify characteristics at 2 years of age that differ between children with confirmed cerebral palsy (CP) and a non-CP diagnosis by 5 years of age. This was a retrospective cohort analysis. A CP diagnosis may be considered a 'probable' diagnosis at 2 years, which is often 'confirmed' at 4 or 5 years, particularly in the context of CP registries. A total of 1683 children with a diagnosis of CP or probable CP at 2 years of age were identified from the Canadian Cerebral Palsy Registry, of whom 48 received a non-CP diagnosis at 5 years ('non-confirmed CP'). Perinatal adversity, preterm birth status, Gross Motor Function Classification System (GMFCS) level, presence of comorbidities, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings, and initial CP motor type were compared between the two groups by univariate and logistic regression analyses. χ<sup>2</sup> analysis and multivariate analysis both confirmed that children with a non-CP diagnosis by 5 years of age were more likely to have a normal MRI (χ<sup>2</sup> odds ratio [OR]=7.8, 95% confidence interval [CI]=3.8-16.1; OR=5.4, 95% CI=2.4-12.5), ataxic-hypotonic (χ<sup>2</sup> OR=10.1, 95% CI=4.9-21.2; OR=6.1, 95% CI=2.2-16.2) or dyskinetic CP (χ<sup>2</sup> OR=2.7, 95% CI=1.2-5.9; OR=2.9, 95% CI=1.0-7.6), born at term (χ<sup>2</sup> OR=3.7, 95% CI=1.7-8.0; OR=3.6, 95% CI=1.0-12.1), and lack perinatal adversity (χ<sup>2</sup> OR=4.1, 95% CI=1.6-10.7; OR=3.4, 95% CI=1.0-11.7). Normal MRI, ataxic-hypotonic or dyskinetic CP, lack of perinatal adversity, and term birth are associated with a higher odds of non-CP diagnosis by 5 years of age, thus potentially enhancing diagnostic work-up. Normal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at 2 years was associated with a non-cerebral palsy (CP) diagnosis by 5 years. Diagnosis of ataxic-hypotonic or dyskinetic CP motor subtype at 2 years was associated with a non-CP diagnosis by 5 years. Perinatal adversity and preterm birth were rarer with a non-CP diagnosis by 5 years.
31285787 Normal-pressure hydrocephalus (NPH) is a potentially reversible syndrome characterized by enlarged cerebral ventricles (ventriculomegaly), cognitive impairment, gait apraxia and urinary incontinence. A critical review of the concept, pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treatment of both idiopathic and secondary NPH was conducted. We searched Medline and PubMed databases from January 2012 to December 2018 using the keywords 'normal-pressure hydrocephalus' / 'idiopathic normal-pressure hydrocephalus' / 'secondary normal-pressure hydrocephalus' / 'NPH' / 'ventriculoperitoneal shunt'. The initial search produced 341 hits. After careful selection, a total of 54 articles were chosen and additional relevant studies were included during the process of writing this article. NPH is an important cause of potentially reversible dementia, frequent falls and recurrent urinary infections in the elderly. The clinical and imaging features of NPH may be incomplete or nonspecific, posing a diagnostic challenge for medical doctors and often requiring expert assessment to minimize unsuccessful surgical treatments. Recent advances resulting from the use of non-invasive MRI methods for quantifying cerebral blood flow, in particular arterial spin-labeling (ASL), and the frequent association of NPH and obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), offer new avenues to understand and treat NPH.
31285788 Dementia is a public health issue making the screening and diagnosing of dementia and its prodromal phases in all health settings imperative. using PRISMA, this systematic review aimed to identify how low-, middle-, and high-income countries establish dementia and cognitive dysfunction diagnoses in primary health care. studies from the past five years in English, Spanish, and Portuguese were retrieved from Scopus, PubMed, Embase, Lilacs, Scielo, and Web of Science. Of 1987 articles, 33 were selected for analysis. only three articles were from middle-income countries and there were no studies from low-income countries. The most used instrument was the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE). Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) and dementia criteria were based on experts' recommendation as well as on the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) and International Classification of Diseases (ICD-10), respectively. differences between these criteria among high- and middle-income countries were observed.
31285789 Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) presents clinically in three variants: one behavioral and two with progressive primary aphasia - non-fluent/agrammatic and semantic. Defined by the degenerative process and cerebral atrophy, olfactory dysfunction occurs in up to 96% of previous FTD case series. the present study aims to critically synthesize data about the relationship between FTD and olfactory impairment to analyze the usefulness of olfactory evaluation tests as a complementary element in early diagnosis. a database search was performed using the keywords 'olfactory OR smell OR olfaction AND frontotemporal dementia'. We included studies that evaluated olfactory function in patients diagnosed with frontotemporal dementia, all subtypes, compared with age-matched healthy controls. For comparative purposes, the effect size was calculated using Cohen's D. The studies selected were categorized according to dementia variant and olfactory test type. A meta-analysis was performed using forest plots - homogeneity was evaluated by statistical tests (i<sup>2</sup> and Cochran Q). ten articles met the inclusion criteria. Heterogeneity was classified as low for semantic dementia olfactory identification and behavioral variant olfactory discrimination groups (i<sup>2</sup> = 0 and 3.4%, respectively) and as moderate for the behavioral variant olfactory identification group (i<sup>2</sup> = 32.6%). patients with the frontotemporal dementia behavioral variant seem to present with alterations in odor identification, but with preserved discrimination. Scent identification also seems to be impaired in semantic dementia. Therefore, we conclude that olfactory evaluation in these patients is possibly impacted by cognitive alterations and not by sensory deficits. Application of olfactory tests may prove important in differentiating prodromal states from other types of dementia with more pronounced olfactory impairment.
31285790 In addition to drug treatment, surgical intervention represents an alternative to PD patients with motor deficits. The most common intervention is subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation (STN-DBS). It is extremely important to perform a neuropsychological assessment in patients with STN-DBS, not only to identify losses related to the disease, but also to compare influence on cognition both pre and postoperatively. the objective of this systematic review was to investigate the instruments frequently used in studies related to STN-DBS in PD patients. articles were retrieved from Medline/Pubmed databases published in the 2007-2017 period using PRISMA criteria. after analyzing 27 articles, the absence of a specific evaluation protocol for PD with STN-DBS was evident. non-motor symptoms are not given due importance in neuropsychological assessments. It is crucial to acknowledge that these symptoms have a major impact on the quality of life of patients. Greater engagement in assessing these aspects is required, in order to bridge the gaps in research.
31285791 Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is a major cause of chronic disability. Less than a quarter of moderate and severe TBI patients improved in their cognition within 5 years. Non-invasive brain stimulation, including transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS), may help neurorehabilitation by boosting adaptive neuroplasticity and reducing pathological sequelae following TBI. we searched MEDLINE/PubMed and Web of Science databases. We used Jadad scale to assess methodological assumptions. the 14 papers included reported different study designs; 2 studies were open-label, 9 were crossover randomized clinical trials (RCTs), and 3 were parallel group RCTs. Most studies used anodal tDCS of the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, but montages and stimulation parameters varied. Multiple studies showed improved coma recovery scales in disorders of consciousness, and improved cognition on neuropsychological assessments. Some studies showed changes in neurophysiologic measures (electroencephalography (EEG) and transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), correlating with clinical findings. The main methodological biases were lack of blinding and randomization reports. tDCS is a safe, non-invasive neuromodulatory technique that can be given as monotherapy but may be best combined with other therapeutic strategies (such as cognitive rehabilitation and physical therapy) to further improve clinical cognitive and motor outcomes. EEG and TMS may help guide research due to their roles as biomarkers for neuroplasticity.
31285792 Individuals with low health literacy have less knowledge of their own health condition. Carers play a key role in older people's activities of daily living. to evaluate the performance of carers of older people using the S-TOFHLA (Short Test of Functional Health Literacy in Adults) and to identify caregiver characteristics associated with low functional health literacy. a cross-sectional study was conducted. The S-TOFHLA, a sociodemographic instrument, the Mini-Mental State Exam and the Patient Health Questionnaire-2 were applied to 80 carers of older patients routinely followed by doctors from the Primary Health Care Sector of the City of Botucatu, São Paulo. The multivariate analysis used an ordinal logistic regression model with test (S-TOFHLA) scores as the dependent variable. The level of statistical significance adopted was 0.05. the individuals had a mean age of 54.6 (± 11.7); 27% of the carers evaluated had inadequate levels of health literacy (S-TOFHLA ≥54). A higher proportion of individuals with low education had inadequate or marginal health literacy (p<0.001). nearly 1/3 of the carers had marginal or inadequate levels of health literacy. These results highlight the difficulties of many carers in understanding health information.
31285793 Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) is a non-invasive, painless and easy-to use-technology. It can be used in depression, schizophrenia and other neurological disorders. There are no studies about longer usage protocols regarding the ideal duration and weekly frequency of tDCS. to study the use of tDCS twice a week for longer periods to improve memory in elderly with MCI. a randomized double-blind controlled trial of anodal tDCS on cognition of 58 elderly aged over 60 years was conducted. A current of 2.0 mA was applied for 30 minutes for 10 sessions, twice a week. The anode was placed over the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (LDLFC). Subjects were evaluated before and after 10 sessions by the following tests: CAMCOG, Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), Trail Making, Semantic Verbal Fluency (Animals), Boston naming, Clock Drawing Test, Word list memory (WLMT), Direct and Indirect Digit Order (WAIS-III and WMS-III) and N-back. After 10 sessions of tDCS, significant group-time interactions were found for the CAMCOG - executive functioning (χ<sup>2</sup> = 3.961, p = 0.047), CAMCOG - verbal fluency (χ<sup>2</sup> = 3.869, p = 0.049), CAMCOG - Memory recall (χ<sup>2</sup> = 9.749, p = 0.004), and WMLT - recall (χ<sup>2</sup> = 7.254, p = 0.007). A decline in performance on the CAMCOG - constructional praxis (χ<sup>2</sup> = 4.371, p = 0.037) was found in the tDCS group after intervention. No significant differences were observed between the tDCS and Sham groups for any other tasks. tDCS at 2 mA for 30 min twice a week over 5 consecutive weeks proved superior to placebo (Sham) for improving memory recall, verbal fluency and executive functioning in elderly with MCI.
31285794 Additional clinical tools should be investigated to facilitate and aid the early diagnosis of cognitive decline. Postural control worsens with aging and this may be related to pathological cognitive impairment. to compare the balance of older adults without dementia in a control group (CG) and with Alzheimer's disease (AD), to observe the possible association with the independent variables (diagnosis, age, gender, and global cognition) and to verify the best posturographic analyses to determine the difference between the groups. 86 older adults (AD = 48; CG = 38) were evaluated using the Berg Balance Scale (BBS) and postural control was assessed by stabilometry on the Wii Balance Board <sup>®</sup> (WBB). Independent T, Mann-Whitney U-tests, Effect Size (ES) and a linear regression were performed. there was a significant difference for Elliptical Area, Total Velocity, Medio-Lateral displacements with closed eyes and open eyes, antero-posterior, with closed eyes and BBS between groups. These variables showed a large effect size for BBS (-1.02), Elliptical Area (0.83) with closed eyes, Medio-Lateral (0.80, 0.96) and Total Velocity (0.92; 1.10) with eyes open and eyes closed, respectively. Regression indicated global cognition accompanied by age, gender, and diagnosis influenced postural control. patients with AD showed impaired postural control compared to Control Group subjects. Total Velocity with closed eyes was the most sensitive parameter for differentiating groups and should be better investigated as a possible motor biomarker of dementia in posturographic analysis with WBB.
31285795 Semantic verbal fluency (SVF) is one of the most widely used tests for cognitive assessment due to its diagnostic utility (DU). our objective is to evaluate the DU to detect cognitive impairment (CI) of a short version of the SVF applied in 30 seconds (SVF<sub>1-30</sub>). a prospective sample of consecutive patients evaluated in a Neurology Unit between December 2016 and December 2017 were assessed with the Global Deterioration Scale (GDS), 30-second and 60-second SVF tests (animals), and the Fototest, which includes a fluency task of people's names. The DU for CI was evaluated by the area under the ROC curve and effect size ('d' Cohen). the study included 1012 patients (256 with CI, 395 with dementia). SVF<sub>1-30</sub> shows a good correlation with GDS stage. The DU of SVF<sub>1-30</sub> is identical to that of the classical version, applied in 60 seconds, (SVF<sub>total</sub>) for CI (0.89 ± 0.01; p > 0.50), and shows no significant difference for dementia (0.85 ± 0.01 vs. 0.86 ± 0.01, p > 0.15). the DU of SVF<sub>1-30</sub> is similar to that of the SVF<sub>total</sub>, allowing a reduction in examination time with no loss of discriminative capacity.
31285796 The Movement Disorder Society has published some recommendations for dementia diagnosis in Parkinson disease (PD), proposing the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MOCA) as a cognitive screening tool in these patients. However, few studies have been conducted assessing the Portuguese version of this test in Brazil (MOCA-BR). the aim of the present study was to define the cut-off points of the MOCA-BR scale for diagnosing Mild Cognitive Impairment (PD-MCI) and Dementia (PD-D) in patients with PD. this was a cross-sectional, analytic field study based on a quantitative approach. Patients were selected after a consecutive assessment by a neurologist, after an extensive cognitive evaluation, and were classified as having normal cognition (PD-N), PD-MCI or PD-D. The MOCA-BR was then applied and 89 patients selected. on the cognitive assessment, 30.3% were PD-N, 41.6% PD-MCI and 28.1% PD-D. The cut-off score on the MOCA-Br to distinguish PD-N from PD-D was 22.50 (95% CI 0.748-0.943) for sensitivity of 85.5% and specificity of 71.1%. The cut-off for distinguishing PD-D from MCI was 17.50 (95% CI 0.758-0.951) for sensitivity of 81.6% and specificity of 76%.
31285797 Limited formal education is still common in ageing populations. Although limited formal education seems to be independently and negatively associated with cognition, functional abilities and frailty in ageing, no studies have examined whether the gradient of limited formal education has an impact on health in later life. to examine the relationship of limited formal education with cognitive status, functional abilities, and frailty status. a cross-sectional study was conducted involving 540 older adults stratified into groups: no formal education, 12-24 months of education, and 25-48 months of education. Cognitive screening (MMSE), functional abilities (Lawton Index), and frailty (CHS criteria) were measured. Regression analyses were performed. 27% had no formal education, 21% had 12-24 months of formal education, and 55% had 25-48 months of formal education. Limited formal education has a clear gradient of negative impact: No formal education was associated with scoring below MMSE cut-off scores (OR = 7.9), being totally/partially dependent for IADLs (OR = 2.5) and frail (OR = 2.0). Having 12-24 months of education was associated with scoring below MMSE cut-off scores (OR = 5.2) and with being frail (OR = 2.0). The No formal education group was 10.1 times more likely to have worse cognitive scores, worse functional abilities and frailty/pre-frailty status concomitantly (CCoFF), while older adults who had 12-24 months of education had a 4.6 times greater chance of having CCoFF. limited education had a gradient association with cognitive performance, functional disability and frailty. These findings clearly emphasize the importance of prevention through education from childhood to older age.
31285798 Despite the significance of discourse impairments, they have not been thoroughly investigated in Persian-speaking patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD). the aim of this study was to perform a multi-level analysis of narrative discourse in Persian-speaking patients with mild AD and to compare them with healthy elderly. the study included 14 older adults with mild AD and a matched group of 14 healthy elderly. Using a storytelling task based on serial pictures, both macro- and micro-linguistic aspects of narrative discourse were assessed. Cohesion ratio and coherence were investigated as macrolinguistic dimensions of discourse. The studied microlinguistic features included syntactic complexity and verbal errors (mostly involving phonological and semantic paraphasias and mazes). Severity of AD was determined using the Cognitive Dementia Rating (CDR). there were significant differences between the groups regarding cohesion ratio (0.9 ± 0.34 vs. 1.29 ± 0.45, p = 0.02) and coherence scores (2.43 ± 0.41 vs. 3.02 ± 0.81, p = 0.03). Verbal errors and syntactic complexity did not differ significantly between the groups. Persian-speaking patients with mild AD show macrolinguistic impairments in producing discourses based on picture description. Therefore, intervention protocols should focus on the ability to organize information on a specific subject and also to connect sentences produced using appropriate cohesive ties.
31285799 The Moroccan school system suffers from recurring dysfunctions as reported by the National Evaluation Body (NEB). These results lead to the degradation of learning and academic performance, in which several factors come into play. In Morocco, studies focusing on the neurocognitive profile of students and its influence on school performance are very limited or rare. In this context, the present study aims to study the role of working memory in school performance among Moroccan high school students. our sample contains 146 high school students. A total of 78 boys and 68 girls participated in this study and the numerical version of The Rey-Osterrieth Complex Figure test (ROCF) was used to assess working memory. Moreover, school performance is represented in this study by the mean obtained during the first semester. the results of multiple linear regression revealed that working memory significantly explains variation in school performance. neuropsychological abilities, particularly working memory, significantly explain the deterioration in school performance of students reported by the National Evaluation Body.
31285800 The age-old debates about the localization of the mind (higher functions) took a new course when Willis located a higher nervous function (memory) in the brain parenchyma, and supposedly, in the cerebral cortex. About two centuries later, Broca, founded on solid scientific reasoning, localized a circumscribed area of the 3<sup>rd</sup> frontal circumvolution of the left hemisphere as the seat of articulate language, a higher function (speech - language domain). He (and Dax) also defined the functional asymmetry (specialization) of the hemispheres, with left dominance (for language). The period between the findings of these individuals was not quiescent, as numerous authors contributed with their theoretical and clinicopathological research toward creating a conducive scientific atmosphere for this accomplishment, and should be regarded as important. Further studies, in the decades that followed, revealed the localization of additional aspects of language and of other higher functions (cognitive domains).
31285801 The ability to repeat words is almost always preserved in thalamic aphasia. The pathophysiology of both thalamic aphasia and preservation of repetition are not fully understood. In a case of severe aphasia with preserved repetition after a left thalamic hemorrhage, MRI disclosed left thalamic lesion and loss of fractional anisotropy in the left centrum semiovale. FDG-PET showed severe hypometabolism in the left cerebral hemisphere, except for superior and transverse temporal gyri, calcarine fissure and frontopolar regions. Primary sensory function may be less functionally dependent on thalamic connections than heteromodal and paralimbic areas, which have connections with several thalamic nuclei. The extensive cortical hypometabolism due to diaschisis may have been responsible for the severity of the aphasia, whereas the less severe reduction of metabolism in the superior and transverse temporal gyri, and also, albeit less evident, in Broca's area, might explain the preservation of repetition.
31291419 The study's objectives: compare self-report measures of weight and height with direct measures; assess the impact of these discrepancies on body mass index (BMI) and prevalence of overweight and obesity; and apply correction models to the self-report measures and assess the degree of improvement in the corrected measures produced with the use of these models. A cross-sectional study was performed, assessing 4,151 adults (18 to 60 years) participating in the São Paulo Megacity Epidemiological Study. Linear regression models stratified by sex were proposed for correction of self-reported measures. Agreement was assessed with the intraclass correlation coefficient for the direct measures, self-report measures, and corrected measures, and kappa coefficient for BMI classification categories. Self-reported weight and the resulting BMI were underestimated, while height was overestimated, compared to direct measures. With all the correction models, the corrected measures were closer to the direct measures. Prevalence rates for excess weight, calculated by self-report measures, were underestimated by 24% in men and by 28% in women; with corrections, the underestimation decreased to 8% and 10%, respectively. The results showed moderate agreement for self-report measures and substantial agreement for corrected measures compared to direct measures. The use of correction equations for self-report data proved to be a useful method for producing more trustworthy estimates of prevalence of overweight and obesity in the general population, usually estimated from self-report measures of weight and height in population surveys.
31291422 This paper provides estimates of mortality rates from Alzheimer's disease dementia (AD) in the elderly Brazilian population. Data were obtained from the 2010 Population Census by Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE) and microdata on mortality in Brazil's 27 state capitals recorded in the Brazilian Mortality Information System (SIM) for the population 65 years or older by place of residence for the years 2009 to 2013. Corrections were obtained for underreporting of mortality, and final adjustments were made to the specific mortality rates based on Bayesian methods with prior probability distributions built on the basis of information obtained from a meta-analysis. The mortality rates from all dementias and from AD in Brazil were higher than in developed countries. The mortality rates from Alzheimer's disease in 2013 were 140.03 (95%CI: 117.05; 166.4) and 127.07 (95%CI: 103.74; 149.62) per 100,000 inhabitants, respectively, in men and women. The contribution of AD to mortality in elderly Brazilians was 4.4% (95%CI: 3.25; 5.72) in the group with 0 to 3 years of schooling, independently of age and sex. The study aimed to increase knowledge on corrected estimates of mortality rates from Alzheimer's disease based on vital statistics, providing more precise and pertinent evidence-based estimates.
31291423 The current study aimed to grasp the healthcare aspects present at the basis of the indiscriminate use of benzodiazepines. Based on a partnership between a Brazilian university and a Cuban university, the study aimed to understand the practices related to the use of these drugs in primary care and the meanings healthcare workers assign to them. The research was part of a multiple case study in the cities of São Paulo and Diadema (Brasil), and Santiago de Cuba (Cuba). The fieldwork data collection strategy was based on individual interviews and focus groups. Data were analyzed thematically and yielded five themes: (i) no man's land: lack of management of benzodiazepine use by primary care workers; (ii) inadequate indications: the benzodiazepine prescribed for unjustifiable situations; (iii) salvation and perdition: the medicine as attenuating the difficulty of acting in mental health by primary care professionals; (iv) limited empowerment to work in mental health; and (v) fragmented care: dissociation of the psychosocial care network. Limited grasp of mental health issues by primary care workers, fragmented care, work overload with what are considered other priorities, deficiencies in the availability of therapeutic resources, and limited investment in specific training contribute to the inadequate use of benzodiazepines. Independently of the health contexts, the challenges are similar for the health systems and can only be confronted if they become a priority for the organizations' management and the health workers as a whole.
31291426 The aim of this study was to identify multidimensional profiles of lifestyle risk factors, verifying sociodemographic characteristics and self-rated health. Data were obtained from the Brazilian National Health Survey (2013) for 45,881 individuals 30 years and older. Identification of the profiles used the Grade of Membership (GoM) method, with 12 variables. Analysis of associated characteristics used Pearson's chi-square test and logistic regression. Two profiles were identified: 'healthy profile' (61.6%), characterized by adequate consumption of fruits, vegetables, and fish, non-regular consumption of sodas, meat with fat, and beans, normal weight, and recommended leisure-time physical activity, and 'risk profile' (38.4%), characterized by lack of consumption of healthy markers, except consumption of beans, consumption of all the unhealthy dietary markers, replacing meals with snacks, alcohol consumption, smoking, and leisure-time physical inactivity. The healthy profile was associated with female gender, old age, white skin color, residents in the North and Northeast of Brazil, widows/widowers, married marital status, more schooling, and better self-rated health. The risk profile was associated with male gender, young adults, residents in the Central and South, single marital status, less schooling, and worse self-rated health. Although more prevalent, the percentage of individuals with complete classification in the healthy profile was low. Lifestyle risk factors are associated with sociodemographic characteristics.
31291428 This study aimed to analyze the perspective of women who used the childbirth plan on their childbirth experience, the meanings of the childbirth plan and its components, and the relationship between the childbirth plan and labor and delivery. A qualitative descriptive study was performed. Data were collected with the questionnaire Meanings of Birth - Postpartum Contacts, applied via telephone contact. The study included women from the city and greater metropolitan area of Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil, that participated in the Meanings of Childbirth Exhibit in May-June 2015 and March 2016, when they were pregnant, with date of previous childbirth having occurred at least a year previously and without having experienced abortion. The questions were analyzed with content analysis. Data analysis revealed the following categories related to the childbirth plan: 'presence of an accompanying person', 'information on procedures', 'use of pain relief methods', 'use of anesthesia to continue with normal delivery', 'eating during labor', 'presence of a doula', 'no unnecessary intervention', 'normal delivery', 'umbilical cord cut after pulsation', 'presence of postpartum breastfeeding', and 'respect/treatment'. There was a direct relationship between performing the childbirth plan and a positive childbirth experience. This highlights the importance of using the childbirth plan as a technique that favors a positive childbirth experience. Women's development of the plan during prenatal care and its use by the attending healthcare team contributes to favorable labor.
31291431 The study estimated parameters for planning and programming the supply of procedures for screening, diagnostic workup, and treatment of precursor lesions of uterine cervical cancer. These estimates were used as the basis for assessing the adequacy of Brazil's production of procedures performed by the Brazilian Unified National Health System (SUS) in 2017. Estimates were calculated using as the reference the recommended management in the national screening guidelines. Data on screening tests were obtained from the Information System on Uterine Cervical Cancer and the follow-up data from patient charts in a referral center for cervical pathology. Brazil's production of procedures was obtained from data in the Outpatient and Hospital Information Systems of the SUS. For every one hundred thousand women in the target age bracket for screening (25 to 64 years) there was an estimated annual need for 44,134 cytopathology tests, 1,886 colposcopies, 275 biopsies, 236 type 1 and 2 outpatient exicision procedures, 236 type 2 and 3 hospital exicision procedures, and 39 high-complexity referrals for surgery, chemotherapy, and/or radiotherapy. Applying the estimated parameters to the number of women screened in Brazil in 2017, a deficit was identified in all the procedures for adequate follow-up of the women with altered test results, varying from 7% in colposcopies to 74% in type 3 excisions. The results point to the need to expand and upgrade the supply of line of care procedures for cervical cancer. The estimated parameters can support policymakers in programming and implementing organized screening programs.
31291432 Sanitation data for 2008 indicated that 74.4% of Brazilian municipalities (counties) with more than 50,000 inhabitants were receiving fluoridated water, but no criteria were adopted to validate the information. The study aimed to verify the accuracy of information on water fluoridation, using as the reference water surveillance data from municipalities with more than 50,000 inhabitants in 2008 and during 2010-2015. Data from different sources were used, comparing the information pertaining to the period. Water samples were collected, and fluoride concentration was obtained by the electrometric method. Verification was performed by comparing the data obtained from different sources. Data were compared for 601 (97.9%) municipalities. The proportion of municipalities that performed surveillance based on external control increased from 39.4% to 48.5%. There was a high rate of false positives and false negatives (15.1%) in the data for 2008. Municipal coverage was 70.2%, or 4.2 percentage points below the published estimate (74.4%) for 2008. Surveillance records were observed in 54.3% of the fluoridated municipalities whose population coverage reached at least 50% of the population receiving treated water. There was an important improvement in fluoridation surveillance data, despite a high percentage of false positives and negatives. There are still wide interregional differences in the surveillance of water fluoridation in this sample of Brazilian municipalities, raising important public health challenges.
31291433 to determine if computed tomography represents a safe option for penetrating heart injury screening. retrospective transversal study which confronted tomographic findings with the ones detected in surgical exploration in patients that had undergone surgery because of suspected cardiac trauma from January, 2016 to January, 2018. seventy-two cases were analysed; 97.2% of them were males, and the most prevalent age range was 20 to 29 years; 56.9% of them presented injuries caused by firearm shots and 43.1% by cutting weapons. In 20 cases, computed tomography suggested heart injury, confirmed in 13 cases during surgery. Sensitivity of computed tomography was 56.5%, reaching a specificity of 85.7%. computed tomography must not be adopted as a routine for the screening of penetrating heart injuries.
31291434 This article proposes the use of a safe surgical checklist in the teaching of the discipline of Ambulatory Surgery during medical graduation. It discusses its benefits and potential implementation and adherence difficulties. It underscores the importance of developing a patient safety culture and active learning methodologies to train students for greater commitment and accountability with the quality of care provided to the community in the academic outpatient clinic of the school hospital.
31291436 to evaluate the quality of oral health care in Primary Health Care services in Pernambuco state, Brazil, 2014. this was an ecological health evaluation study based on the Donabedian model, involving secondary data from the 2nd cycle of the National Program for Improving Access and Quality of Primary Health Care (PMAQ-AB); comparison between the structure, process and outcome variables was done using the Kruskal-Wallis test (p<0.050); variables showing statistical significance (p<0.05) were portrayed through thematic and spatial dependence maps. Results: the standard of quality in the municipalities for the 'Structure' dimension gained better scores than the 'Work process' dimension; correlations were identified between the indicators for dental urgency, supervised tooth brushing coverage and treatments completed, in quality strata related to the work process of the Oral Health teams. organization of the work process was seen to be a determining factor in the impact on some indicators of service use.
31291437 to analyze the incompleteness of variables retrieved from the Live Birth Information System (SINASC) and the Mortality Information System (SIM), in the State of Rio de Janeiro, in the time series 1999 to 2014. this was a time series study of SINASC and SIM; the Romero & Cunha score was used to analyze incompleteness; Joinpoint regression was used to analyze temporal trend; in 2014, deaths were evaluated separately according to investigation. regarding SINASC variables, in 1999 marital status (37.40%), number of stillborn children (31.30%), and race/skin color (24.63%) had the highest incompleteness percentages; in 2014, no variable exceeded 5% incompleteness, except occupation; regarding SIM variables, in 1999 five variables exceeded 20%, and missing data for previous stillborn children was over 60%; in 2014, only one variable exceeded 20% incompleteness; investigated deaths had better completeness. both systems were found to have improved; the quality of SINASC completeness remained superior to that of SIM.
31291438 to describe the prevalence of noncommunicable diseases (NCDs), long term (current) drug therapy, blood pressure levels and capillary glycemia among a nursing team at a charitable hospital in Pelotas/RS. This was a cross-sectional study. The questions were adapted from the Vigitel system questionnaire (Telephone Surveillance of Chronic Disease Risk and Protection Factors). All participants had their blood pressure and blood glucose measured. Of the 272 staff assessed, 29.4% reported having NCDs, 48.9% were on long term (current) drug therapy and 73.9% reported a family history of NCDs. Among those interviewed, 20.6% reported using antihypertensive drugs, of these 27.7% had high blood pressure levels, and 2.6% reported using antihypoglycemic agents, 42.9% of whom had high blood glucose. Among those professionals who stated they had high blood pressure and diabetes, those who were on medication had higher blood pressure and glucose levels than those who were not on medication.
31291439 to investigate the frequency of exclusive breastfeeding, early introduction of other foods and association with prevalence of low weight in Brazilian children. we analyzed records of children under 6 months of age held on the Food and Nutrition Surveillance System for the year 2015; associations were investigated through Poisson Regression. we found prevalence of 56.1% (95%CI 55.3;56.8) for exclusive breastfeeding, 8.1% (95%CI 7.7;8.5) for low weight for age, and 5.7% (95%CI 5.3;6.7) for low BMI for age; water or teas and infant formulas were the earliest foods introduced; underweight prevalence was lower (PR=0.73 - 95%CI 0.61;0.87) as was prevalence of low BMI (PR=0.69 - 95%CI 0.56;0.85) among exclusively breastfed infants; infant formula intake was associated with low weight (PR=1.35 - 95%CI 1.15;1.58). the importance of exclusive breastfeeding for adequate growth in the first 6 months of life was reinforced.
31292022 Excessive portal venous pressure in the liver remnant is an independent factor in the occurrence of posthepatectomy liver failure and small-for-size syndrome. The baseline portal pressure prior to hepatectomy was not considered previously. The aim of this study is to assess the impact of portal pressure change during hepatectomy on the patient outcome. Prospective observational study including 30 patients subjected to intraoperative measurement of portal pressure before and after hepatectomy. This variation was related to the patient outcome. Control group evaluation was assessed. Patient, disease and procedure features were considered. The optimal cut-off of portal pressure variation was determined. Linear regression or logistic regression was applied to identify predictors of the outcome. The univariate analysis showed that portal pressure increase after hepatectomy was associated with coagulation impairment in the first 30 postoperative days (p < 0.05), and with the occurrence of major complications (p = 0.01), namely hepatic failure (p = 0.041). The multivariate analysis showed that portal venous pressure increase ≥ 2 mmHg is an independent factor for worse outcomes. As in previous studies, this study concludes that, after hepatectomy, in addition to the functional liver remnant, other factors are responsible for deterioration of liver function and patient outcome, such as the portal pressure increase and the exposure to chemotherapy prior to hepatectomy. This work may influence the definition of future indications for portal influx modulation. Patient outcomes are influenced by the portal venous pressure increase: an increment ≥ 2 mmHg after hepatectomy seems to increase the risk of major complications.
31292023 The mortality rate due to cervical cancer is higher in Portugal compared to other European countries. This study aimed to evaluate the time-trends in cervical cancer mortality rates observed in Portugal over the last six decades. Age-standardized cervical cancer mortality rates reported in Portugal between 1955 and 2014, were collected from the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC). Joinpoint regression analysis was used to identify significant changes in mortality rates by assessing the percentage of annual variation (%AV) of the rate and respective 95% confidence interval (95%CI) according to the age groups. Among women with 30-39 years, cervical cancer mortality decreased 1.9% per year (95%CI: -2.3; -1.4) throughout the time-period, reaching 0.5/100 000 in 2014. Among women aged 40-49 years, CC mortality decreased between 1971 and 1981 (%AV = -11.6; IC 95%: -14.6; -8.6). Rates then increased by 2.4% per year (95%CI: 1.0; 3.8) until 2001 and such trend reverted from 2001 onwards (%AV = -5.2; IC 95%: -7.7; -2.6), reaching 3.0/100 000 in 2014. In women aged 50-64, 65-74 and 75 years or older, cervical cancer mortality rates decreased from 29.2 to 6.7/100 000, from 34.3 to 7.7/100 000 and from 24.7 to 9.2/100 000. The decline in mortality rates in these three age groups occurred mainly between 1970 and 1980, and there have been no significant changes in the last three decades. In Portugal, the most impressive decline in cervical cancer mortality rates occurred in the 1970s concurrently with changes in the National Healthcare System. The most important changes were the increased access to early diagnosis and the improvement in therapeutic approaches. The plateau that we observed among older women over the last three decades can be partially explained by factors with negative impact on adherence to cervical screening. There was a marked decrease in mortality due to CC among all age groups. However, we observed a plateau of this indicator in more advanced age groups over the last three decades. These findings suggest the need of promoting adherence to cervical screening in Portugal.
31292024 This study aimed to describe demographic, socioeconomic and pregnancy-related characteristics associated with a caesarean delivery in Luanda. We conducted a cross-sectional study which included 995 puerperal women and who were assessed between December 2012 and February 2013 at Lucrécia Paím maternity hospital in Luanda, Angola. Data was collected using a structured questionnaire administered by trained interviewers. Logistic regression models were fitted to estimate the magnitude of associations (odds ratios-95% confidence intervals) between the type of delivery and variables showing a significant association in the bivariate analysis. The prevalence of caesarean section was 44%. Women with caesarean delivery were less educated, resided more often in a periurban area and were more likely to disclose lower family income when compared with women who had vaginal delivery. Living in a periurban area was significantly associated with a caesarean delivery regardless of all covariates considered, for primiparous women (adjusted odds ratios, 95% confidence intervals = 2.14, 1.27 - 3.62) and for multiparous women (1.78, 1.26 - 2.51). Among multiparous women, a lower family income was also significantly associated with caesarean delivery. Hypertensive disorders during the current pregnancy were associated with a caesarean delivery in the multivariate models fitted for primiparous (3.96, 1.57 - 9.98) and for multiparous women (1.68, 1.03 - 2.74). The associations between low socioeconomic position and high risk of caesarean delivery demonstrated in this study are consistent results in previous researches curried out in African contexts. The poorer and less educated women, who live far from health facilities, have few antenatal care visits and often arrive with complicated conditions, justifying a caesarean delivery. Lack of qualified human and material resources to manage emergencies in peripheral health centers and delaying in the reference system also leads to an increase in the number of caesareans performed in this particular maternity hospital. Sociodemographic differences were observed according to the type of delivery. Cesarean section was more prevalent among women with lower income and residents in periurban areas.
31292025 Pre-exposure prophylaxis is defined as the use of antiretroviral drugs to prevent HIV acquisition in uninfected individuals. Recognizing the increasing use of informal pre-exposure prophylaxis in Portugal, CheckpointLX, a community clinic targeted to men who have sex with men in Lisbon, Portugal, began offering counselling and follow-up services prior to formal introduction. This study aims to characterize pre-exposure prophylaxis users attending CheckpointLX before formal pre-exposure prophylaxis introduction in Portugal, and those who were referred to pre-exposure prophylaxis in the National Health Service following formal approval of pre-exposure prophylaxis. Data was collected by peer counsellors between May 2015 and September 2018 and inserted in a database. Medical care followed the European AIDS Clinical Society recommendations for pre-exposure prophylaxis eligibility, initiation and follow-up. For formal pre-exposure prophylaxis, the General-Directorate for Health's Pre-exposure Prophylaxis guidelines checklist was used. Until the end of May 2018, CheckpointLX had a total of 90 appointments for wild pre-exposure prophylaxis, of which 64 (71%) were first time visits. As for the 380 service users referred to the National Health Service, most were Portuguese (n = 318, 84%), and the mean age was 31 (8.9) years old. Condomless sex in the last six months with partners of unknown HIV status was the most common eligibility criteria (n = 59, 83%). Pre-exposure prophylaxis delivery should be complemented with effective information on the importance of immunization and education on safer practices of drug administration, in the scope of broader preventive sexual health care. Much remains to be done in Portugal to ensure that pre-exposure prophylaxis is available to those who need it the most. Offering pre-exposure prophylaxis at community clinics could be a first step.
31292026 Cellulitis and erysipelas represent the most frequent cause of hospitalization in the dermatology department of Santa Maria Hospital in Lisbon, Portugal. The aim of this study was to investigate whether patient demographics, comorbidities, previous episodes of cellulitis/erysipelas, the presence of complications, laboratory markers at admission, microbial isolation or previous use of antibiotics, are associated with prolonged stays. Retrospective analysis, including patients admitted with cellulitis/erysipelas in the inpatient dermatology department of Santa Maria Hospital between July 1st 2012 and June 30th 2017. There were 372 admissions, corresponding to 348 patients. The median length of stay was 11 days. Increased age (p = 0.002, OR 1.03, 95% CI 1.01 - 1.04), previous episode of cellulitis/erysipelas requiring hospitalization (p = 0.005, OR 4.81, 95% CI 1.63 - 14.23), the presence of cellulitis/erysipelas-associated complications (p = 0.001, OR 3.28, 95% CI 1.63 - 6.59), leukocytosis (p = 0.049, OR 1.81, 95% CI 1.00 - 3.30), high levels of C-reactive protein (p = 0.035, OR 1.03, 95% CI 1.00 - 1.06) and a positive culture result (p = 0.002, OR 2.59, 95% CI 1.41 - 4.79) were associated with prolonged hospitalization. Prolonged hospitalization for cellulitis/erysipelas is associated with higher costs, additional clinical investigation, invasive treatments, prolonged courses of antibiotic therapy, risk of nosocomial infections, and delayed return to activities of daily living. Thus, the investigation of clinical-laboratory factors associated with prolonged hospitalization for cellulitis / erysipelas is essential and may be useful for the construction of a severity score. The knowledge of the characteristics that are associated with prolonged stay among patients with cellulitis/erysipelas may be relevant to improve health care, by reducing the length of hospital stay and associated risks and costs.
31292027 Skin and skin structure infections are an increasing cause of hospitalization. Although mortality is relatively low, skin and skin structure infections are associated with prolonged hospital length of stay and high costs. Oxazolidinones have been suggested as a tool to treat infected patients in the ambulatory setting in order to decrease hospital length of stay. We wanted to address the evidence associated with the use of oxazolidinones in the treatment of skin and skin structure infections. In this observational retrospective study we analyzed the anonymized diagnosis related group coded information from the Portuguese database for hospital admissions, that included all adult patients with a diagnosis of oxazolidinone use and a SSSI, discharged between 2010 and 2015. During the study period, a total of 5518 patients had a diagnosis of oxazolidinone treatment. We selected 483 of those who were also diagnosed with a skin and skin structure infections. Their mean age was 64.9 years and 62.7% were male. The median hospital length of stay was 27 days (Inter quartile range 13 - 56) and the mortality rate was 12.6%. The prevalence of secondary anemia and of thrombocytopenia in the whole group treated with oxazolidinones was 2.5% and 3%, respectively. Despite the high bioavailability of oxazolidinones, we were not able to find evidence that its use was associated with a decrease of mortality or hospital length of stay (due to early discharge) of patients with skin and skin structure infections. In this study we were not able to find evidence that oxazolidinones had any clinically significant benefit. A structured approach, including antibiotics with favorable pharmacokinetic and safety profile as well as a carefully planned ambulatory follow up may be needed.
31292029 Fibrous dysplasia is a bone disease characterized by an osteoblastic dysfunction resulting in a fibrous replacement of the normal medullary bone. We describe the case of a 33-year-old who presented with low back pain irradiating to her right leg. Both the computed tomography scan and magnetic resonance imaging showed an osteolytic, multicystic lesion of the right hemi-sacrum with invasion of the right S1 foramen. She underwent foraminotomy and curettage of the lesion. Histological diagnosis was fibrous dysplasia, without features of malignant transformation. Three years after surgery the patient is asymptomatic and imaging is stable. This is the fifth known case of monostotic fibrous dysplasia involving the sacrum, a rare entity that must be considered in the differential diagnosis when approaching patients with sacral lesions.
31389475 To describe the characteristics of elderly patients attended in a teaching hospital emergency room due to falls. Descriptive, quantitative, cross-sectional study performed at a hospital emergency room. The data was collected in November 2017, considering the medical records of 1.460 elderly patients, with a registry related to fall as the main complain. A descriptive analysis of the data was performed. The main results show that most elders were female (66.92%), older than 80 years old (27.27%), single (41.37%), and hypertensive (78.79%). Falls from ground level comprised 88.56% and their main consequence was trauma (55.65%). 66.30% were discharged after consultation. The characteristics of the elderly were: female, age above 80 years old, single, and hypertensive. The most frequent type of fall was from ground level, traumas were the main consequences and the discharge after consulting the most common outcome.
31389476 Analyze the scientific evidence, national and international, about contributions and challenges of nursing management in hospital care. Integrative literature review, with guiding question: What are the scientific evidence about nursing management in hospital care? Data was collected in LILACS, PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL and EMBASE databases. The final sample of 14 articles resulted in two categories: 'Contributions' and 'Challenges.' Contributions refer to aspects that facilitate the development and organization of work from a technical-political perspective, by qualifying the productive processes. The challenges were related to professional development, work satisfaction, overload, quality of service, conflict resolution and teamwork. Management and care processes are inseparable, requires adequate and up-to-date knowledge to provide a better care experience for the health services user and coordinate team actions.
31389478 To evaluate the quality of Primary Health Care according to the level of satisfaction of elderly users. An exploratory-descriptive study, with a quantitative approach, performed with 381 elderly users of Primary Health Care. For data collection, the Service Quality scale (SERVQUAL) was adapted to the context of the Primary Health Units (UBS) of Family Health Strategy (ESF) and a questionnaire with 44 questions was elaborated. Data was treated using SSPS® and analyzed using descriptive and inferential statistical techniques. the SERVQUAL subscales 'expectations' and 'perceptions' exhibited excellent reliability and internal consistency, with Cronbach's Alpha 0.948 and 0.932, respectively. The evaluated dimensions presented negative Gaps results: tangible aspects -0.65, reliability -1.19, responsiveness -0.56, guarantee -0.91, and empathy -0.52. negative Gaps in all dimensions show gaps in the quality of services and demonstrates the low satisfaction of the elderly users of UBS/ESF/APS.
31389479 To recognize how educational technologies are not up-to-date and do not care about head and neck oncology. Qualitative, exploratory-descriptive research. Held with 12 nurses, at a cancer reference center in the south of the country, in July/2017. Through a semi-structured interview and data analyzed by Minayo Thematic Analysis. Results of two categories: 'The techniques of updating the nurse' and 'The use of educational technologies in the nurses' daily life'. In this context, a version of the present in the training of students stands out, since the data of secondary education are permanent, evidencing a small use of technological resources for this purpose. It is suggested to integrate the use of technologies with lifelong education in order to become popular in professional practice.
31389480 To elaborate and validate a teaching virtual contemporary object, video-lesson, about resuscitation cardiopulmonary with adult in life support care using automatic external defibrillator in the hospital environment. This is an applied research of techonlogical productions in witch the video-lesson elaboration was according to the methodological trajectory proposed by Fleming, Reynolds and Wallace. The research was accomplished in the Minas Gerais University State and in the Ribeirão Preto Nursing School (Brazil). Sixteen expertises nurses in the area of urgency and emergency participated of this research. The AC1 Gwet's statistic was used to the interobsevers agreement. The validation of script and storyboard to the video-lesson development was reached the interobsevers agreement, classified as 'moderate agreenment' according to Landis and Kock, with AC1=0.59 and p<0.0001. The video-lesson elaborated and validated in this research represent an adequate contemporary important strategy to aplication in the teaching-learning process.
31389487 To explore the actions and factors associated to patient advocacy by intensivist nurses using the Protective Nursing Advocacy Scale. A quantitative, descriptive-exploratory, cross-sectional study. The questionnaire was answered by nurses who worked in Intensive Care Units in the South and Southeast regions of Brazil. A factorial exploratory analysis of the data, T-tests and the chi-square test were used for association between factors. 451 nurses participated in the study. A greater number of nurses disagreed with the negative consequences that patient advocacy may have or bring to them. Greater dialogue among nursing staff would enhance teamwork results. Nurses with two or more job relationships need more physical and mental effort, which compromises their quality of life and work, leading to them being those who least practice patient advocacy. Nurses understand patient advocacy as an important part of their work, as well as factors which may influence their decision to defend their patients, but are still unaware of the benefits of advocacy.
31389488 To evaluate the predictive clinical factors for ocular dryness and for the nursing diagnosis Risk for dry eye in the ocular surface of hospitalized adult patients in an intensive care unit. A cross-sectional study was conducted between January and July 2016, with 206 patients (412 eyes). An inference about the presence of the diagnosis in the evaluated patients was performed by diagnostic nurses. The descriptive and inferential statistics subsidized the data analysis. 47.6% of the patients presented Risk for dry eye, and 52.4% were already diagnosed with ocular dryness. Statistical differences between the ocular dryness diagnosis in the right eye with hyperemia, mucous secretion, eyelid edema and lagophthalmia were identified. In addition, statistical differences were observed between hyperemia and eyelid edema with Risk for dry eye in the left eye and with the nursing diagnosis Risk for dry eye. Hyperemia, mucous secretion, eyelid edema and lagophthalmia are the predictive clinical factors for the nursing diagnosis Risk for dry eye and also of ocular dryness in the intensive care unit environment which deserve special attention in the preventive evaluation.
31389523 to describe the teaching strategy based on the Multiple Victims Incident (MVI) simulation, discussing and evaluating the performance of the students involved in the initial care of trauma victims. a cross-sectional, and quantitative study was performed. A realistic MVI simulation involving students, and professionals from nursery and medical schools, as well as a prehospital care team was performed. it was possible to notice that the classification according to the START method (Simple Triage and Rapid Treatment) was correct in 94.1% of the time from the analysis of 17 preestablished checklists. Following the primary evaluation with the ABCDE mnemonic, all steps were performed correctly in 70%. However, there was only supply of oxygen in high flow in 64.7% of the examination. The search for visible and hidden bleeding was performed in 70.6% of the examination. The neurological evaluation with the Glasgow coma scale and pupillary evaluation occurred in 70.6% of the victims. The victims exposure was performed in 70.6% of the examination. a simulated environment allows the consolidation and improvement of professional skills, especially when we are talking about a poorly trained area during the undergraduate program, such as the MVI. Early training and teamwork encourage clinical thinking, integration and communication, essential abilities when facing chaotic situations.
31389524 to evaluate the feasibility of abbreviated fasting in oncologic colorectal surgeries, as well as the impact on the surgical outcome of the patients. prospective randomized comparative study with patients undergoing elective colorectal cancer surgeries from May to September 2017. Patients were randomized electronically into two groups according to the preoperative fast to be adopted: conventional or abbreviated. of the 33 patients included, 15 followed the abbreviated fasting protocol and 18 the conventional fasting. Both groups had comparable profiles. No patient underwent mechanical preparation of the colon. In 69.7% of the cases, surgery involved low rectal dissection. The procedures were equivalent in relation to intraoperative variables and severe complications. The time to achieve complete oral intake was shorter for abbreviated fasting (10 versus 16 days, p=0.001), as well as the length of inhospital stay (2 versus 4 days, p=0.009). Hospital costs were lower in the abbreviated fasting (331 versus 682 reais, p<0.001). The univariable analysis revealed a correlation between complete oral intake and abbreviated fasting [HR 0.29 (IC95%: 0.12-0.68] and abdominal distension [HR 0.12 (IC95% 0.01-0.94)]. After multivariable analysis, abbreviated fasting presented a lower time for complete oral intake [HR 0.39 (IC95%: 0.16-0.92]. the abbreviated preoperative fasting favors the metabolic-nutritional recovery, reducing the time for complete oral intake. The implementation of the abbreviation protocol reduces hospital admission costs.
31389525 to characterize the profile of potential and effective organ donors, and to identify the factors related to non-donation. the data was collected from the Organization of Organ Donation forms during the period of January 2013 to April 2018. The statistical analysis was done by the Biostatistic Service of the School of Medical Sciences of UNICAMP. the study analyzed 1,772 potential donors; the male gender was predominant (57.39%). Vascular injuries (n=996) were the main cause of brain death. The family refusal (42.8%) was the leading cause of non-donation of organs. There was statistical difference between donors and non-donors in regard to the mean age and mean systolic blood pressure. There was also a relationship between the donation of organs and the absence of diabetes and smoking. the majority of effective organ donors were young males. The main causes of brain death (BD) and family refusal of organ donation were cerebrovascular disorder and no desire to donate organs after death, respectively. Alcoholics and males were more frequently found in traumatic causes of BD. Therefore, initiatives for population awareness and discussion among the families regarding organ donation can lead to increase the number of effective organ donors.
31389527 Brazil has changed a lot since the enactment of the 1988 Federal Constitution. Although substantial advances have occurred in the health sector, old problems persist and new ones arise. The main goal of ensuring the universal right to health has not been achieved. The 16th National Health Conference will be held in 2019, an opportune moment to analyze the history, the present moment and the announcing trends. This text seeks to contribute to this analysis based on the results of studies on the developing health conditions of the population and the Brazilian health system in the last 30 years. It identifies the strengthening of the private sector and capital in the health sector, to the detriment of the public interest and the SUS. Finally, it discusses the strategies of the struggle for the right to health necessary and possible in the current context.
31389530 Excessive interventions during labor in Brazil have been reported as disrespect and abuse and contribute to neonatal and maternal morbidity and mortality. The Senses of Birth exhibition aims to encourage normal birth to promote health and improve the experience of childbirth in the country. This article describes the characteristics of 555 women who visited the exhibition during pregnancy and their perception of obstetric violence in childbirth. Obstetric violence was reported by 12.6% of the women, mostly low-income and unmarried. It was associated to lithotomic position and Kristeller maneuver during childbirth and non-immediate skin-to-skin contact with the baby. The main categories of obstetric violence reported were: not accepted interventions /accepted interventions on the basis of partial information (36.9%), undignified care / verbal abuse (33.0%); physical abuse (13.6%); non-confidential / non-privative care (2.9%) and discrimination (2.9%). Visiting the exhibition significantly increased pregnant women's knowledge about obstetric violence. However, recognition of obsolete or harmful practices as obstetric violence was still low. Initiatives such as Senses of Birth may contribute to increase knowledge and social mobilization to disseminate good practices in childbirth care.
31389531 This study aims to analyze the factors associated with aggression perpetrated by unknown assailants among young males treated by the emergency services. It is a case-control study with data from the Violence and Accident Surveillance System conducted in 2014 by 86 emergency services located in Brazilian State capitals. Young males between 15 and 29 years of age were included. All victims of assault perpetrated by unknown assailants were included as cases. Controls were randomly selected among those who had suffered accidental injuries in the ratio of 2:1. Unconditional logistic regression was used to estimate crude and adjusted odds ratios (OR), and 787 cases and 1,574 controls were included. Risk factors according to the adjusted analysis were: lack of paid work (OR 2.09; 95% CI; 1.66; 2.64), alcohol consumption (OR 3.14; 95% CI; 2.36; 4.17), occurrence at night (OR 3.39; 95% CI; 2.50; 4.61) or early morning (OR 5.31; 95% CI; 3.63; 7.75). Higher age (25-29 years) and schooling (5-8 years of study) were factors of protection. The results revealed the need for more effective and multisectoral actions to prevent violence among young males, which consider the factors associated with such aggression, including alcohol consumption, and investments in qualified education and paid employment.
31389533 This study aimed to validate of Fall Risk Tracking Tool (FRRISque) in elderly community dwellers. A cross-sectional evaluative screening study was carried out on a sample of 854 elderly. In addition to the pilot version of FRRISque, the QuickScreen® tool was applied as a standard reference in order to validate a concurrent criterion, determining sensitivity and specificity values. Most of the elderly people were female (57.6%) with an average age of 71.87 years. The multivariate logistic regression analyses showed that only 10 FRRISque items contribute to increased elderly fall risk and they refer to the risk factors of previous falls, use of a walking aid device, polypharmacy, use of psychotropic substances, difficulty to ascend and descend a slope, difficulty to walk for a distance of 100 meters, visual and hearing impairment, low physical activity and poorly lit environment. This risk stratification model assumes sensitivity values of 91.3% and specificity values of 73.4%. The FRRISque is defined as a valid, simple, low-cost and of easy and rapid application tool that can be used by all primary health care professionals, including community health workers.
31389534 This paper aimed to identify and analyze in national and international literature whether and how the theme of violence is addressed in the studies of public policies for older adults in Long-Term Care Institutions (LTCI). We conducted an integrative review of the published literature between 2010 and August 2016. The primary bibliographic databases were consulted using descriptors 'idoso', 'políticas públicas', 'instituição de longa permanência para idosos', 'asilo', 'casa de repouso' and 'ILPI' in Portuguese and their equivalent in English and Spanish. A total of 77 papers were analyzed, of which 12 were Brazilian and 65 were foreign (of these, 30 were from the U.S.). The analysis showed that many countries have long-term care policies governing the modalities of service providers. Only eight works addressed the issue of violence within LTCIs within older adults' protection policies, and affirm that countries in Latin America and Asia must advance this agenda and place the issue of violence against seniors on the agenda of priorities. No Brazilian paper addressed the issue directly, although it has become clear that neglect and other forms of violence hang over Long-Term Care Institutions for the Elderly (LTCIEs).
31389536 This study explores one of the most interesting and least studied issues in Brazil: the consequences of complex and contradictory experiences by replacing the traditional drinks by cachaça, introduced through interethnic contact. Given the rarity of the study of Maxakali alcohol consumption in research, this study aims to understand, from the native's point of view, the negative aftereffect of alcohol consumption. Although anthropological studies emphasize functions of traditional and contemporary drinking as social 'lubricants', social perceptions of the Maxakali highlight the problems of cachaça bought through interethnic contact. Symbols and meanings of these consequences were interpreted through their daily life histories, recorded by 21 leaders in focus group. Through the interethnic contact, some adaptations have occurred in the Maxakali alcohol use, with negative consequences for those who drink, their families, their villages and their community. In the world-of-life, these changes these changes can be seen through accidents, insults, marital disharmony, neglects, violent behavior, illness and death. This study's findings highlight the importance of producing comprehensive and in-depth knowledge in search of to identify vulnerable groups and to develop participatory solutions.
31389537 An integrative review was performed to identify and analyze national studies on barriers to patient safety incident reporting by health professionals within Brazilian health services. A search in the Virtual Health Library (BVS) Portal, PubMed and Web of Science was performed in January 2017 for papers published in the last ten years. One thousand and seven publications were identified and, following application of inclusion and exclusion criteria, eight papers were analyzed, five of which were qualitative and three quantitative. All research was conducted in hospitals, exclusively with nursing professionals, and 75% was conducted in Southeast Brazil. Most studies showed an under-reporting of incidents, and the main reasons were fear about reporting, reporting focused on more severe incidents, lack of knowledge about the subject or how to report and, registered nurse-centered reporting. While study of this theme is still incipient in Brazil, this review found important weaknesses in the process and barriers to incident reporting by professionals, revealing a need for encouraging their participation, eliminating or reducing such barriers with a view to strengthening patient safety.
31389538 This systematic review and meta-analysis aimed to estimate and compare the prevalences of dental fluorosis in Brazilian cities supplied with non-fluoridated water and in locations that uses groundwater. In December of 2016, cross-sectional studies were searched in eight databases, including the 'grey literature'. The prevalences were estimated through a mixed random effects model considering the locations as subgroups. The heterogeneity among the studies was assessed with I2 statistics and the Cochran's Q test. A total of 1038 records were found, from which only 18 articles met the inclusion criteria and were subjected to analysis. The meta-analytic model estimated a prevalence of dental fluorosis of 8.92 % (95 % CI: 5.41 % to 14.36 %) in cities supplied with non-fluoridated water, and of 51.96 % (95 % CI: 31.03 % to 72.22 %) in cities supplied by artesian wells. The heterogeneity among the studies was high: I2 = 95 % (p < 0.01) in the first subgroup of cities and I2 = 98 % (p < 0.01) in the second subgroup. The prevalence was significantly higher (p < 0.001) in populations exposed to artesian well water, indicating that the presence of natural fluoride at high concentrations represents a risk factor for the occurrence of dental fluorosis.
31389539 Occupational Surveys are methods of collecting data from the cross-sectional studies, which are indispensable for the elaboration of public policies oriented to workers' health. The objective of this study was to perform a systematic review on articles that featured results of Occupational Surveys conducted in Brazil from 2005 to 2015. Based on the Prisma recommendation, this review selected articles indexed in Medline, Lilacs and Scielo databases. Analysis of the data consisted of the description of the Occupational Surveys according to: large regions in which the research was carried out; techniques and instruments used; topics covered; sectors of the economy in which health-work relations were investigated; and methodological criteria. Differences in the distribution of Occupational Surveys were observed regionally and by sector. The structure of the investigations, for the most part, was concerned with identifying sickness in workers. A lack of consensus regarding the methods used was revealed, which consequently prejudiced the comparison of results and monitoring of health and working conditions. Efforts are needed to build consensus and foster research in sectors and regions that are as yet scantly explored.
31389540 In this essay we identified that there are distinct uses for the terms evaluation and analysis. We illustrate this difference by means of an exploratory approach to the titles of articles of interest. Interlocution with agents of the area made it possible to corroborate what was revealed in the exploratory review. The link between evaluation and practice is one of the possible factors for distinguishing it from the notion of analysis, generating consequences for the status of each of them, both in the scientific field and also in terms of common sense.
31389541 This paper presents a descriptive review of laws and regulations on the management of drugs and the residues thereof adopted by countries in Europe, the Americas and Australia. This review integrates relevant points of official documents of regulatory agencies in these countries, as well as important scientific works. All countries surveyed carry out drug management concomitant with the management of the residues thereof, ranging from awareness programs on the rational use and the risks of drugs through to the collection and safe disposal of such residues. Germany, the USA and Sweden demand a prior assessment of the environmental impact caused by a given drug as a criterion for its registration. Sweden is noteworthy in that it periodically updates a list of essential drugs based on risk assessment and the environmental risks posed by the residues thereof. In Brazil, the legal measures proposed including rational prescription and reverse logistics have not yet been effectively implemented. Prior environmental impact assessment safeguards the risks to human health and the wild biota caused by exposure to drug residues. Therefore, these international models could serve as a basis for discussion and/or legal and regulatory changes in Brazil.
31389542 Adolescence is a phase of several structural and functional transformations. Physical exercise is capable of inducing adaptive plasticity on the nervous system, reducing the risks of future psychiatric pathologies. This research aimed to investigate adolescents' knowledge about the benefits of physical exercise on mental health. This is a cross-sectional study, carried out in a state school from a city in the Midwestern region of Minas Gerais. Data collection included a self-developed questionnaire to measure knowledge about the benefits of Physical Exercise on Mental Health, an International Physical Activity Questionnaire and a socioeconomic questionnaire from the Brazilian Association of Research Companies. Data were analyzed with descriptive statistics tools, Kruskal-Wallis and chi-square tests, with a significance level of 5%. We found that individuals that are more active had greater knowledge about the benefits of physical exercise to mental health in relation to sedentary individuals. Thus, knowledge can be a protective factor against sedentarism and physical inactivity, significantly improving the aspects related to the quality of life of the adolescent.
31389543 Morbimortality due to infectious diarrheal diseases still is a serious health issue in Brazil and is highly related to factors such as weather, environment, and people's life conditions. This study aimed to analyze the relationship between hospitalization rates due to infectious diarrheal diseases among the population of the municipality of Rio Branco (AC), Brazil and precipitation, river level, humidity and temperature between 2000 and 2013. Data were retrieved from the Hospital Information System of the SUS (Unified Health System), the National Institute of Meteorology and the National Water Agency. Multiple Poisson and negative binomial regression models were adjusted. Results showed that there is a positive association between hospitalization due to infectious diarrheal diseases and the level of the Acre river (RR: 1.07; CI 95%: 1.04 to 1.1); these hospitalization rates fell 14% between 2000 and 2013 (RR: 0.86; CI 95%: 0.85 to 0.87). The most vulnerable group was the age group of less than 1 year of age. This study showed the vulnerability of an Amazonian city to climate variability and its respective epidemiological influence on the incidence of hospitalizations due to infectious diarrheal diseases.
31389545 Aedes aegypti is currently a critical disease agent and is responsible for viruses such as Zika, Chikungunya and Dengue's four serotypes. This mosquito's relevance to the current social body has come to the fore and triggered urgent EcoHealth investigations since this approach aims to articulate different theoretical fields to understand the historical linkages between nature, society and health. Based on an ethnographic premise, this study considered the unequal and unfair conditions that make women's health vulnerable to dengue, analyzing their practices and perceptions about the potential breeding grounds in the public space. A semi-structured interview and participant observation, as well as a field diary, were used to compose the study. The research included the participation of ten women living in the outskirts of Fortaleza, Ceará, Brazil, from January to August 2014. The category 'Social inequality, context and practices in the public space' emerged from the content analysis. The narratives revealed that unstable living conditions and evident social inequality might influence in a context permeated by waste, with great potential for dengue's mosquito proliferation.
31389549 The aim of the present study was to evaluate knowledge, attitudes and practices regarding tuberculosis (TB) among transvestites and transsexual women. A cross-sectional study was conducted with a convenience sample (n = 124; 58 transvestites and 66 transsexuals) in the city of São Paulo, Brazil, in 2014 and involved the administration of the Knowledge, Attitudes and Practices questionnaire. Absolute and relative frequencies were calculated for all variables and the comparisons of percentage distributions between groups were performed using Pearson's Chi-square test, Fisher's exact test or its generalization, with a 5% significance level. Most participants were young and non-white. Transvestites had lower levels of schooling, reported more passages through the prison system and declared themselves to be sex workers more frequently. Little more than half of the participants were aware that treatment for TB was free of charge. Knowledge on TB was modest, permeated with misunderstandings regarding signs/symptoms, transmission and prevention, which influence attitudes and practices in relation to the disease. The findings demonstrate that health education actions do not achieve their goals in the control of tuberculosis.
31389551 This study aimed to associate frailty with sociodemographic profile and cognition of elderly people living in highly socially vulnerable contexts registered at a Social Assistance Referral Centers in a city of inland São Paulo. This is a cross-sectional and quantitative study with 48 elderly. Data was collected with a sociodemographic interview, the Edmonton Frail Scale and the Montreal Cognitive Assessment, and was analyzed with the Jonckheere-Terpstra test, Spearman's correlation and logistic regression (α = 5.0%). This study was approved under Opinion Nº 72182. Of the 48 elderly interviewed, 33.4% were non-frail, 20.8% were apparently vulnerable and 45.8% were frail at some level (mild, moderate or severe). Women (OR = 4.64) and nonwhites (OR = 3.99) were more likely of being frail. The realms with the greatest influence in the determination of frailty were cognition, independence and functional performance, general health and mood, although gender (p = 0.0373) and ethnicity (p = 0.0284) had a significant association. Worth highlighting is that considering the frailty profile of the elderly warrants the development of specific care strategies for this segment of the population in a vulnerable area, preventing futures complications.
31389552 School performance is a key aspect for future professional and social success. The objective of the present study was to investigate factors associated with adolescents' school performance including sense of coherence (SOC) and oral health status. Three hundred eighty one schoolchildren between 15 and 18 years of age from the city of Campo Grande, Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil, participated in the study. The outcome variable was school performance, assessed through the final grades of the Portuguese and Mathematics disciplines in 2013. Independent variables were sociodemographic data, self-perception of oral health, use of dental services and sense of coherence, obtained through a self-applied questionnaire. In addition, in a clinical assessment, the number of decayed, missing and filled teeth (DMFT index) was evaluated. Logistic regression analyses were performed, based on a hierarchical model. The mean age of students was 16 years; mean DMFT value 4.1, and SOC 44.5. In the final adjustment, the male subjects (p = 0.0021); those with the largest number of people residing at home (p = 0.0021) and weak SOC (p = 0.0005) showed an association with poorer school performance. In conclusion, school performance is a complex phenomenon associated with SOC and oral characteristics.
31389554 Indoor air pollution is exacerbated by the burning of firewood in rustic stoves and poorly ventilated environments. Exposure to the pollutants emitted by this type of fuel results in increased morbidity and mortality. In Brazil, studies and estimates regarding these conditions are scarce. In order to understand this problem, the objective of this work was to investigate the use of firewood using the data series of government agencies to estimate the number of exposed people. The results indicated that firewood is the second most used fuel for cooking, being used by a significant portion of the population, more than 30 million Brazilians. A decisive factor in the increased use of this fuel is the socioeconomic level of the population associated with the price of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG). The studies carried out in the country recorded high concentrations of particles during firewood burning, exceeding the limits suggested by the World Health Organization (WHO). Associations were also observed between the exposure to the pollutants generated by the burning and the aggravation of health problems, among them respiratory diseases and cancer. Replacing fuelwood and other solid fuels with cleaner fuels should be the government's goal to minimize health costs.
31389556 Low calcium consumption and high sodium intake among adolescents is a serious public health problem. Thehigh content and bioavailability of calcium in milk makes it the best choice for meeting the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) for calcium. Since milk also contributes to sodium intake, programs promoting milk consumption should be preceded by initiatives to reduce its sodium content. Knowing the calcium and sodium content of processed milk is essential for establishing the adequate consumption of milk. The aim of this study was to estimate the calcium and sodium content of different brands of powdered and ultra heat treated (UHT) milk sold in supermarkets in Rio de Janeiro and calculate the amount of these milks that should be consumed by adolescents to meet daily calcium needs and the impact of this consumption on sodium intake. Volumetric analysis was used to measure calcium content and sodium content was determined using flame photometry. The mean calcium and sodium concentrations of powdered (mg/26g) and UHT milk (mg/200ml) were 262.5 ± 5.1 mg and 116.8 ± 3.1 mg and 246.0 ± 10.3 mg and 162.5 ± 16.3 mg, respectively. Milk intake sufficient to meet the DRI for calcium among adolescents would result in a sodium intake of 584 mg (39% of the AI) from the consumption of powdered milk and 812.5 mg (54% of the AI) from the consumption of UHT milk.
31389558 This study refers to the impact of the use of pesticides on human health in the São Francisco River Valley region, in which, through semi-structured interviews, the objective was to analyze the influence of social, cultural and economic determinants on the health-disease process of workers exposed to agrochemicals. For data collection, 339 rural workers from irrigated perimeters of the cities of Juazeiro, in the State of Bahia, and Petrolina, in the State of Pernambuco, were interviewed. All were male, of which 182 (53,7%) were rural owners and 157 (46,3%) were employees, predominantly between 40 and 59 years of age among owners and under 39 among workers. Over 50% have a low level of schooling and 55.2% of them have monthly incomes less than or equal to 2 minimum wages. Many of them know about the importance of wearing personal protective equipment (PPE) and the mandatory license for the use and purchase of agrochemicals. However, about 40% do not use PPE or use it inadequately and 28.9% do not have a license to purchase. More than 9% of participants reported cases of intoxication, however, less than 7% sought specialized care. Workers are aware of the risks that the use of agrochemicals expose them to risk situations, but this does not encourage them to change their worksite behavior.
31389559 This descriptive, ecological study of clonazepam consumption in Rio de Janeiro State (RJ) estimated use prevalence from 2009 to 2013 using data from the National Controlled Product Management System operated by Brazil's health surveillance agency, Anvisa. Consumption was measured by total population and by population over 18 years old, using the standardised Daily Defined Doses of 8 mg (anticonvulsant) and 1 mg (sedative-hypnotic). The municipalities of the Rio de Janeiro Metropolitan Region were grouped by Human Development Index (HDI) and GINI index, subjected to cluster analysis and ranked by clonazepam consumption. From 2009 to 2013, consumption in the state rose from 0.35 to 1.97 DDD/1000 population, but the figures are higher for individuals over 18 years of age. A DDD of 1 mg instead of 8mg returns consumption in 2013 of 21 DDD/1000 population over 18 years of age. Consumption in 2013 was highest - 3.38 and 4.52 DDD, respectively - in Rio de Janeiro and Niterói, which have the highest HDIs. This suggests that up to 2% of the adult population uses clonazepam, possibly as a sedative-hypnotic. This broad use and use outside therapeutic indications deserves attention, given clonazepam's potential for abuse and adverse reactions.
31389560 The study sought to reflect on the applicability of Kurt Lewin's psychological field theory to the conception of aging. It involved a reflexive approach to the use of Kurt Lewin's field theory to define and legitimize the experience of aging, and as a strategy for qualifying health professionals as mediators in the dynamics of elderly people's groups. It made it possible to observe that the elderly behave according to their perceptions and not in accordance with reality, react according to what is comfortable or not with their cognitions. Stimulating the elderly to make positive subjective interpretations of other people, things and the aging process induces the idea of satisfaction. And the dynamics of groups can foster the development of a collective action of discussion and reflection on aging. In this sense, the applicability of this theory to the experience of aging can enhance the perception of the elderly themselves as protagonists of interventions and endowed with judgments about well-being and the quality of life.
31389561 Influenza vaccine is recommended for all health workers, but vaccination coverage remains unsatisfactory. A cross-sectional study that aimed to identify factors associated with influenza vaccination was carried out with health workers from a large Hospital Complex in Salvador, Bahia. A self-administered questionnaire was used based on the models 'Knowledge, Attitudes and Practices' and 'Health Belief Model'. The dependent variable was the vaccination status against influenza in 2014, and the independent variables were sociodemographic factors, vaccine history, knowledge and attitudes about influenza/influenza vaccine. Logistic regression was used, odds ratio was calculated with 95% confidence intervals, adjusting for sex, age and occupation. The best multivariate model was chosen through backwards elimination and the Akaike Information Criterion. 755 workers participated. Influenza vaccine coverage was 61.5%, being higher among nurses (69.0%) and lower among physicians (49.1%). The factors associated with being vaccinated against influenza were: knowing that even when healthy, one must vaccinate against influenza (OR = 3.15; 95%CI:1.74-5.71); knowing that the vaccine does not protect for many years (OR = 2.08; 95%CI:1.30-3.33); and not to be afraid of post-vaccine adverse effects (OR = 1.93; 95%CI: 1.26-2.95).
31389562 The scope of this study is to analyze the prevalence and factors associated with Chronic Noncommunicable Diseases (CNCD) in adults living in an impoverished urban area located in Recife in the Brazilian northeast. It is a cross-sectional study with a sample of 631 adults of 20 to 59 years of age. The possible associations of CNCD with demographic, socioeconomic, behavioral and health-related factors were analyzed using Poisson Regression, considering a p value of < 0.05 as being statistically significant. The prevalence of CNCD was 56.7%; highest among males (60.8%); adults aged 50-59 years (80.5%); lower economic class (57.7%); and lower level of schooling (62%). The problem was also associated with individuals with BMI ≥ 25 kg/m2 (34.2%) as well as individuals who reported poor health status (76.4%). In the multivariate hierarchical model, the statistically significant variables were: schooling, BMI, health perception, gender and age bracket. A high prevalence of at least one CNCD was observed, as well as a statistically significant association between CNCD and the following variables: schooling, BMI, health perception, gender and age bracket. These results suggest the need to intensify health promotion actions in poor communities, aiming at enhanced control of health in general.
31391818 To describe and contrast early complementary feeding (ECF) over time in breastfed infants in the Dominican Republic (DR) and Haiti, the two countries that share the island of Hispaniola. Secondary data analysis was conducted on cross-sectional data from Demographic and Health Surveys administered at four different time-points in both countries between 1994 and 2013. Extracted samples were composed of breastfed infants < 6 months of age whose caregivers had responded to dietary questions on food consumption in the previous 24 hours. Plain water was the most frequently consumed complementary substance in both countries. However, the prevalence of water consumption increased in the DR over time, whereas in Haiti it decreased. Milk (non-breast) use was also common and followed a similar pattern as water over time in the two countries. Expanded use of water and milk in the DR are the major contributors to its drop in exclusive breastfeeding (EBF) rates over time. Whereas in Haiti, a reduction in a broader array of liquids and semi-solids/solids overtime appears to have contributed to its markedly improved EBF rates. Determining contributors to the differential trends in water and milk (non-breast) use between these two countries may identify targets for addressing the persistent gaps in EBF on the island of Hispaniola.
31391820 Ascertain whether there are differences in the anthropometric measurements of at-term neonates in a rural population and an urban population at 3 400 m altitude. Descriptive population study of healthy at-term neonates in the Adolfo Guevara Velasco National Hospital (HNAGV) in Cusco and in the Huanoquite Health Center (CSH), [both at 3 400 m altitude in Peru], between 2005 and 2010. Measures of central tendency were calculated, the averages were compared with a Student's t-test, the final model was adjusted by neonatal sex, and the odds ratios (OR) and corresponding confidence intervals (CI95%) were calculated to estimate the strength of association between small for gestational age (SGA) infants (according to weight under P10 and ponderal index [PI]) in mothers who live in the Huanoquite district and those who gave birth in the CSH. In the HNAGV and the CSH, 372 and 368 neonates were studied, respectively. The average maternal age was 31.7 and 27.0 years; previous pregnancies, 2.4 and 3.4; miscarriages, 0.4 and 0.0; live births, 1.0 and 2.3 (p<0.001); and weight, height and PI, 3 311.8 g, 49.5 cm, 2.73, and 3,008.9 g, 48.4 cm, 2.66, respectively (p<0.001). The weight, height, and PI for the two centers were, after adjusting for sex and by gestational age bracket: (37-38 weeks) 3,185.1 g, 49.18 cm, 2.67, and 3,009.8 g, 48.5 cm, 2.64; (39-40 weeks) 3 385.9 g, 49.9, 2.73, and 3 051.8 g, 48.6 cm, 2.66; (41-42 weeks) 3 461, 6 g, 50.2 cm, 2.73, and 3,072.2 g, 49.1 cm, and 2.6, respectively (p<0.001). The OR of SGA births in the CSH was 3.52 (2.4-5.1) according to weight and 2.05 (1.3-3.1) according to PI, compared to birth in the HNAGV. The weight, height, and PI of infants born in the CSH were lower than those born in the HNAGV, and the OR of SGA births was 3,52 according to weight and 2,05 according to PI, respectively.
31391821 The risk-benefit ratio of antiretroviral therapy (ART) is usually considered favorable due to the urgent need to control the HIV/AIDS epidemic. Current studies have shown that combined ART (two or more drugs, from two different classes) is the most effective, with benefits that go beyond clinical management of the disease playing a crucial role in preventing HIV transmission. Therefore, early identification of HIV infection followed by immediate initiation of ART has been encouraged worldwide. However, the success of this strategy has been threatened by poor engagement of patients in HIV care, which may be related to drug harms. In addition, ART is required for the life course, creating the potential for adverse drug reactions (e.g., lipodystrophies). Therefore, adverse drug reactions are a prevalent concern among people living with HIV/AIDS, even in the current era of early initiation of ART ('early ART'), with most drugs considered much safer than those used in previous eras. Accurate diagnosis, recording, and reporting, followed up with proper management and prevention, and intensive surveillance, of new and known adverse reactions to ART, should be strongly encouraged as part of the care continuum.
31391822 The accelerated emergence and spread of antimicrobial resistance observed in recent decades is associated with the abuse and/or misuse of antimicrobial drugs. In 2014, Argentina’s Ministry of Health, in conjunction with other agencies and institutions, rolled out a national antimicrobial resistance control strategy designed to slow or prevent the emergence and spread of resistant bacteria. This article describes the action proposed and results obtained during the first implementation period in terms of improving human health surveillance, creating an animal health surveillance network, planning antimicrobial drugs consumption surveillance, monitoring restrictions on sales, adapting dosage forms to treatment needs, updating the antimicrobial drugs registry and diagnostic methods, restricting the use of these drugs as growth promoters, encouraging responsible use, preparing diagnostic and treatment guidelines, creating antimicrobial drugs management programs, and strengthening infection prevention and control programs in health facilities and livestock production.Many of these measures, particularly those related to antimicrobial drugs regulation, control, and management, can be implemented immediately, reducing the unnecessary use of these products, and with it, the impact on antimicrobial resistance.
31391823 Describe the epidemiological profile and analyze clinical manifestations by age group in chikungunya patients treated in 2015 in a Mérida, Mexico general hospital. An observational study describing chikungunya cases recorded by the Department of Epidemiological Surveillance from July to December 2015 and analyzing clinical manifestations by age group. A logistic regression model was used to analyze the association between signs and symptoms and hospital admission. A total of 830 diagnosed chikungunya cases were treated. Average age was 27.4 ± 17.05 years and the male-to-female ratio was 1:1.4. Most patients came from urban areas (n = 592, 87%) and, in particular, the capital city. Contact with the arthropod vector in the peridomiciliary area was reported in 723 (90%) cases. Muscular and joint impairments were more frequent in the older groups, while rash was more frequent in younger groups. Neurological and non-neurological manifestations of severity did not show greater prevalence in any one age group. Chikungunya patients had primarily self-limited benign cases, while neurological manifestations such as lethargy, persistent vomiting, hemorrhage, photophobia, and intense headache were predictive of severity and their timely identification in children under 1 year of age was possible through close monitoring.
31391824 This report examines the challenges of conducting a multicenter, cross-sectional study of countries with diverse cultures, and shares the lessons learned. The Latin American Study of Nutrition and Health (ELANS) was used as a feasibility study involving the most populous cities of eight countries in Latin America (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Peru, and Venezuela) in 2014-2015, about 40% of the population of the Americas. The target sample included 9 000 individuals, 15-65 years of age, and was stratified by geographic location (only urban areas), gender, age, and socioeconomic status. Six principal challenges were identified: team structuring and site selections; developing a single protocol; obtaining ethic approvals; completing simultaneous fieldwork; ensuring data quality; and extracting data and maintaining consistency across databases. Lessons learned show that harmonization, pilot study, uniformity of procedures, high data quality control, and communication and collaboration across sites are imperative. Barriers included organizational complexity, recruitment of collaborators and research staff, institutional cooperation, development of infrastructure, and identification of resources. Consensus on uniform measures and outcomes and data collection methodology, as well as a plan for data management and analysis, communication, publication, and dissemination of study results should be in place prior to beginning fieldwork. While challenging, such studies offer great potential for building a scientific base for studies on nutrition, physical activity, and other health topics, while facilitating comparisons among countries.
31391825 Determine the effectiveness of the Integrated Growth and Development Strategy (ECDI, Spanish acronym) of World Vision Peru on anemia, malnutrition, psychomotor development, and child care and protection in children aged <3 years living in three rural communities of Ayacucho Region, Peru. A quasi-experiment was carried out in three rural districts of Ayacucho Region, Peru. Anemia was measured using capillary blood and the HemoCue® analyzer, with hemoglobin values adjusted for altitude. Malnutrition was measured with anthropometric indicators for height and weight, using the World Health Organization's Anthro software. Psychomotor development was measured with the Abbreviated Test of the Ministry of Health of Peru. Child care and protection was measured using a form specifically designed for this purpose. Three measurements were carried out: baseline in May 2013, midpoint in November 2013, and final in May 2014. In total, 283 children had two or more measurements including the final measurement, and 205 had all three measurements. Multivariate analysis for repeated measures showed that ECDI had an estimated 33.1% effectiveness in reducing anemia (95% CI: 1.0%-54.7%), adjusted for age, sex, consumption of iron-rich foods, consumption of iron-absorption-enhancing foods, consumption of iron-absorption-inhibiting foods, having received iron supplementation in the last six months, and having participated in the <i>Cuna Más</i> Program. ECDI was effective in improving nutrition in children aged <36 months through anemia reduction and increased consumption of iron-absorption enhancers. Interventions that include educational and community monitoring components could be of great assistance to combating anemia in children aged <36 months in rural communities.
31391826 The objectives of this study are to validate the construct of the stages of grief scale (FD-66) as an instrument for measuring the stages of grief and to evaluate its usefulness in discriminating among patients with chronic non-communicable diseases in terms of adherence to the pharmacological treatment prescribed. A cross-sectional study was conducted from April to October 2015 to determine the association between the stages of grief and treatment adherence. Data were collected using a prolective design. Three instruments were applied: a sociodemographic document, the FD-66 scale, and the Morisky-Green questionnaire. Patients with a history of CNCDs were recruited from the Gustavo A. Madero Family Medicine Clinic in Mexico City. The data were analyzed using the appropriate statistical tests. A total of 165 patients were included. It was observed that high scores on the subscales of denial (odds ratio [OR]: 1.124; confidence interval of 95% [CI95%]: 1.066-1.186; <i>P</i> < 0,001); anger (OR: 1.157; CI95%: 1.080-1.240; <i>P</i> < 0.001), and depression (OR: 1.071; CI95%: 1.029-1.116; <i>P</i> = 0.001) are associated with poor treatment adherence; however, a high score on the acceptance subscale (OR: 0.913; CI95%: 0.880-0.948; <i>P</i> < 0.001) is associated with good treatment adherence. The greatest sensitivity among the subscales was observed in the denial and anger stages (area under the [ABC] curve: 0.597 in both). The FD-66 is an instrument with good construct validity as a tool for measuring the stages of grief and makes it possible to identify patients with CNCD that will adhere to treatment. We therefore recommend its use in outpatient medical consultations. Furthermore, our findings indicate that grief is a risk factor that increases poor treatment adherence.
31391828 Opportunities for strengthening surveillance of meningococcal disease exist between and within countries in Latin America. In August of 2015, a workshop was convened in the city of São Paulo, Brazil, to address the following objectives: 1) to review meningococcal disease burden and vaccine use in Latin America; 2) to evaluate the effectiveness of current meningococcal surveillance practices in the region; 3) to identify challenges to meningococcal surveillance in the region; and 4) to outline steps for strengthening meningococcal surveillance and disease control in the region. Based on the workshop's discussions, recommendations for strengthening surveillance and controlling meningococcal disease in Latin America focus on improving: a) laboratory capabilities for diagnostic testing; b) communication regarding epidemiologic- and laboratory-based analyses; c) communication during outbreaks; d) monitoring of long-term disease outcomes; e) knowledge of vaccines against serogroup B disease; and f) criteria for defining and controlling meningococcal outbreaks. Overall, improving surveillance will help guide strategies for meningococcal disease prevention and control in Latin America.
31391829 Identify barriers and reasons why children under 5 do not get vaccinated in some Colombian cities. Qualitative design based on interviews and focus groups of health workers and caregivers in four Colombian cities selected according vaccination coverage and population densities. Different factors were identified that may hinder completion of vaccination schedules in the two municipalities with low coverage, such as fear of a post-vaccination reaction, socioeconomic and geographical conditions and population safety, working conditions of the vaccination staff, administrative and economic problems, and precarious information systems. From a qualitative standpoint, the vaccination teams and caregivers pointed to social and institutional issues that may hinder vaccination coverage in the cities that participated in the study.
31391830 Three highly effective vaccines are available to prevent human papillomavirus (HPV) infection, and they have been introduced in many countries around the world. This article describes advances and challenges in introducing HPV vaccines in the Expanded Program of Immunization (EPI) of countries in Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC). We reviewed national and regional sources of information to identify LAC countries with and without universal HPV vaccination, along with the year of introduction, type of HPV vaccine, vaccination scheme, age groups targeted, and coverage level reached. Incidence rates of cervical cancer were compared across countries with and without an HPV vaccination program, in order to identify inequities in access to HPV vaccines. So far, 10 LAC countries have supplied data on their vaccination policies and vaccination coverage rates to the Pan America Health Organization. The majority of those 10 started their vaccination programs using quadrivalent vaccine. Only Chile, Ecuador, and Mexico started their programs using a two-dose scheme. However, by the end of 2016, most of the other countries had switched from a three-dose to a two-dose scheme. Different age groups are targeted in the various programs. Some countries vaccinate one-year birth cohorts, while others vaccinate multiple-year birth cohorts. By the end of 2014, coverage with at least two doses ranged from a low of 2% to a high of 86%. With the exception of Venezuela, the LAC countries with the largest populations introduced universal HPV vaccination between 2010 and 2014. Despite the progress that has occurred in some LAC countries, there are still 10 LAC nations with cervical cancer rates above the LAC average (21.2 cases per 100 000) that have not introduced an HPV vaccine in their EPI. With several key adjustments, HPV vaccination programs across Latin America and the Caribbean could be substantially strengthened. Ongoing monitoring of HPV infection outcomes is needed in order to assess the impact of different vaccination policies.
31391831 An ecological study was conducted to estimate the burden of incident tuberculosis attributable to diabetes in the Region of the Americas.Population size, the prevalence of diabetes, and the incidence of tuberculosis (TB) in the adult population of each country in 2013 were used to estimate the percent population attributable risk.The estimated population attributable risk was 16.8% (CI 95%: 10.8-23.8%), which corresponds to 25,045 (16,050-35,741) incident cases of TB per year. Diabetes is an important determinant of the incidence of tuberculosis in the countries of the Region of the Americas and may account for up to 1 in 4 incident TB cases. For countries, the intersection of both epidemics poses the dual challenge of providing integrated are and control of comorbidity and its structural social determinants.
31391832 To present the narratives of Brazilian members of family health teams with regard to the humanism perceived in the practice of Cuban physician cooperating in the <i>Mais Médicos</i> program. Cross-sectional descriptive case study. A semi-structured interview was applied to Brazilian members of family health teams who had worked from the beginning of the program with Cuban physicians in selected municipalities included in the <i>Mais Médicos</i> program (20% or more of the population in extreme poverty and less than five physicians or a rate of 0.5 physicians per 1, 000 population prior to the program). The data were processed using the content analysis technique. Interviews were held with 30 senior nurses, 28 nursing assistants, one administrative technician, and 19 health agents. The interviewees offered a positive assessment of the work of the Cuban cooperating physicians, emphasizing their responsibility, ethics, and humanism, as well as the high quality of their medical -consultations and their good relations with their peers in basic health care teams. There were confirmed differences between the patterns of care of the Cuban cooperating physicians in the <i>Mais Médicos</i> program and the physicians who were working before in the studied communities prior to implementation of that program. The differential features of the Cuban physicians most frequently mentioned include their commitment to the population (both in medical consultations and in solving people's problems), their empathy, their respect, and in general, the human values with which they treat patients.
31391833 Compare World Health Organization (WHO) guidelines for contraception in a human rights framework with the existing regulatory frameworks of Bolivia, Colombia, and Uruguay and evaluate which aspects of those regulations need to be developed. A systematic analysis was based on the WHO analytical framework 'Ensuring human rights in the provision of contraceptive information and services: Guidance and recommendations' to determine whether the legislation of Bolivia, Colombia, and Uruguay contain general references to the population, specific references to adolescents, or do not refer to the topic. To this end, 36 documents related to contraception were analyzed: 9 from Bolivia, 15 from Colombia, and 12 from Uruguay. It was confirmed that each country's legislation complies with several WHO recommendations. The three countries have strengths in nondiscrimination and in opportunity for informed decision-making, and have weaknesses in accessibility, quality, and accountability. Acceptability is a strength in Colombia and Bolivia, and confidentiality is a strength in Bolivia and Uruguay. Colombia has weaknesses in availability, confidentiality, and participation. Comparison of national legislation with WHO guidance helps to see the strengths and weaknesses of national regulatory frameworks and to see opportunities to improve regulations.
31391834 Given the international dimensions of the social, economic, and environmental determinants of health and their manifestations, countries are increasingly negotiating with each other and actively participating in global health governance and global governance in general, which is unequivocally linked to health. This implies that health ministries need trained staff. This report is a reflection on how to strengthen this function in health ministries through training in health diplomacy. It analyzes the experience of the Program for Strengthening Cooperation for Health Development as part of Cooperation among Countries for Health Development (CCHD), developed by the Department of External Relations, Partnerships and Resource Mobilization of the Pan American Health Organization and the Center for International Relations in Health of the Oswaldo Cruz Foundation (CRS/FIOCRUZ). This analysis is based on feedback from participants and from facilitators and coordinators of CCHD, and it attempts to develop concepts stemming from their experiences, with the aim of explaining the current situation and reflect on the concepts and practices of health governance and cooperation between health ministries. Since health diplomacy is a concept still in construction, training experiences in health diplomacy should promote critical analysis and reflect identity, based on the conceptions and practices of stakeholders in the processes of global governance and cooperation between health ministries. This article also identifies the requirements and processes of human resources training in health diplomacy.
31391838 Describe health inequalities with regard to coverage indicators stratified by socioeconomic factors and place of residence. An ecological study was conducted with data from the 2003 and 2008 Demographic and Health Surveys and the 2012 National Health and Nutrition Survey, with analysis of 15 variables for socioeconomic and place-of-residence stratifiers. Calculation of the composite coverage index showed that the poorest groups have moved closer to the richest groups, bridging the inequality gap; change in the richest quintiles has not been as rapid as in the poorest quintiles. Several of the indicators have seen more rapid progress in the poorest group, such as that for deliveries attended by health personnel; other indicators showed reduced growth in reduction of inequality. Chronic malnutrition in children under 5 has decreased; however, anemia in this age group has increased. The indicators showed advances in reduction of inequality and reduction in the gap between the poorest and richest groups. Expected growth in the use of family planning methods may not have been reached because of the existence of conditional cash transfers. Strategies should be evaluated, such as iron supplementation in children under 5, where provision of the supplement has increased, but it has not had an impact on anemia reduction.
31391841 Maternal and neonatal immunization (MNI) is a core component of the new immunization model in the Americas, which transitioned from immunization of children to that of the entire family. Immunization during pregnancy protects the mother and the fetus by providing the neonate with maternal antibodies against disease. It has the potential to impact early childhood morbidity and mortality, and thus MNI has gained visibility and priority on the global health agenda. The Region of the Americas is a leader in MNI, as seen by its elimination of congenital rubella syndrome in 2015 and the progress made toward neonatal tetanus elimination. In the Americas, 31 countries currently target pregnant women for influenza vaccination; and 21 countries-over 90% of the Region's birth cohort-have nationwide newborn hepatitis B vaccination. This paper describes the status of MNI in the Americas and identifies gaps in the evidence, obstacles to optimal implementation, and opportunities for future improvements. Catalysts for MNI in the Region have been political commitment, endorsement by scientific societies, an established 'culture of vaccination,' widespread access to antenatal care, and context-specific communications; however, universal and equitable access for pregnant women and their newborns continues to be a formidable challenge, and additional vaccine safety and effectiveness evidence is needed. Continued efforts to integrate MNI with maternal and child health services will be critical to furthering the MNI platform as well.
31391842 Analyze the sustainability and integration of priority programs in the framework of the Pan American Health Organization’s 2014 Strategy for Universal Access to Health and Universal Health Coverage (Universal Health). A non-systematic review was carried out of the recent literature focused on analysis of integration and sustainability. The main result extracted from the literature review is the need to address sustainability in a way that goes beyond the limits of any analysis restricted to financial sustainability. Although integration and sustainability are not interpreted uniformly, an approach that includes integration as a facilitating factor of the EPI sustainability process does stand out. Effectiveness of EPI integration strategies depends to a large extent on considering the presence, strengthening, and transformation of organizational and institutional structures that facilitate the participation of actors with the technical and political ability to ensure its implementation processes. Thus, political processes can be weighed that legitimize an agenda to include EPI in the Universal Health strategy and, accordingly, as an integral part of health systems strengthening.
31391843 Identify the degree of empowerment and the characteristics of the social support for individuals with chronic kidney disease (CKD). Cross-sectional study of people with chronic kidney disease living in the municipality of Hidalgo, Michoacán, Mexico, who belong to the Association of Kidney Patients, Civil Association. The study examined the sociodemographic profile and personal characteristics associated with the disease, the degree of empowerment, the degree of social support, and family functioning. Close to 90% of the sample receives sufficient social support, while 40% of the participants belong to semi-cohesive or cohesive families The overall empowerment score was 117.5 ± 14.3; community empowerment was higher in the older group (<i>P</i> < 0.05). Positive social interaction is the social support component most strongly correlated with the degree of empowerment (<i>r</i> = 0.333; <i>P</i> < 0.01). Empowerment is determined by, and is a determinant of, social support and has facilitated access to renal replacement therapy in this community.
31391845 Chile maintains a health system segmented by risks and income. A Presidential Commission convened in 2014 presented two scenarios for its health system in accordance with a timeline of expected results. For the long term, it proposed a vision for the direction of the Chilean health system that would converge in a single public insurance. For the short term, it proposed a transition that consisted of regulating pension health institutions to function under social security rules and principles. The central approaches were based on international evidence of systems that have achieved success in offering universal health access and coverage to the population, through appropriate transformations and regulations. The analysis carried out by the Commission signaled the beginning of a new paradigm for health policies in Chile. This points out that the strategy used previously-to promote greater competition and freedom of choice in health insurance markets-has not yielded results, and that in order to advance towards equitable access to health it is necessary to focus on the right to health and the principles of solidarity and equity, as well as assessing progress in the world, recognizing that the Chilean scheme moves away from the best practices in terms of the design of health systems. The proposal has not been implemented yet, and it will be necessary to propose an accelerated implementation plan for its longterm vision. Chile's experience is relevant for other countries in the Region of the Americas that discuss the problems of health segmentation.
31391846 Analyze results with respect to cortisol reactivity (CR) in experimental stress paradigms in adults with or without a psychiatric disorder who suffered violence in early developmental stages (infancy or early adolescence); and use these results to propose a clinical tool to determine biological stress indicators. A systematic review was conducted using several databases and following PRISMA criteria; of a total of 231 articles, 16 satisfied the inclusion criteria and the results were analyzed qualitatively. Despite heterogeneity, the results suggested that the people who suffered violence at an early age present a pattern of low CR. In contrast, people who also developed symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder and depression, regardless of the type of violence, showed increased CR. The majority of studies focused on people who suffered childhood sexual abuse and half of the articles supported the hypothesis that CR is more pronounced in men than in women. The results of this review suggest that cortisol hyperreactivity can be considered a biomarker for treatment and intervention in people with post-traumatic stress disorder and depression who suffered violence at an early age. The results also support evidence that experiencing violence alters stress response and mental health in the long term. However, it is necessary to conduct more studies, in particular studies on hyporeactivity and gender differences.
31391847 Propose and apply a methodology to estimate adjusted expected expenditure in each locality in the Chilean primary health care (PHC) system in 2016. First of all, expected per capita expenditure at the national level was calculated on the basis of a detailed health plan, and then a zero-sum adjustment was made to the expenditure in each locality, using the local age/sex profile and the local average socioeconomic level, years of life lost, and rurality, given their statistically significant impact on epidemiology and spending structures. The model establishes a conceptual and empirical link between expected expenditure and adjustment variables; it is flexible in terms of successive improvements; and its zero-sum property facilitates discussion of the global budget. When real data for the year 2016 in Chile were used, it was found that the absolute distance between the amounts in the model and the amounts actually used that year was 7.6%, on average. There are simple empirical options for calculating expected expenditure across localities, for which it is very helpful to have a good estimate of expected expenditure at the national level.
31396584 Bioimpedance spectroscopy (BIS) devices utilize biophysical modeling to generate body composition data. The addition of body mass index (BMI) to modified Xitron-Hanai-based mixture equations improved BIS estimates of intracellular water (ICW), particularly at the extremes of BMI. A 3-compartment model for distinguishing excess fluid (ExF) from normally hydrated lean (NHLT) and adipose tissue may further improve BIS estimates. We aimed to validate a BIS approach based on the Chamney model for determining fat mass (FM) in healthy individuals (NHANES) and for measuring FM changes in individuals undergoing massive weight loss. Using adult NHANES 1999-2004 (2821 female, 3063 male) and longitudinal pre-to-post-RYGB (15F) data, we compared dual-energy-X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) and BIS for FM. We applied BIS adiposity-corrected values to Chamney equations for normally hydrated lean and adipose tissue (NHLT, NHAT) and FM. Method agreement was evaluated by correlations, paired t-tests, root mean square error (RMSE), Bland-Altman (B-A) analysis, and concordance correlation coefficients (CCC). Method agreement between BIS and DXAFM was good in healthy adults (r=0.96, CCC=0.93, p<.0001), and pre-to-post-RYGB (r=0.93-0.98, CCC=0.81-0.86, p<.001). Although cross-sectional FM measures differed, FM change measures post-RYGB did not (35.6±8.9 vs. 35.2±9.2 kg, BIS vs. DXA) and agreed well (r=0.84, p<.0001). The 15 subjects with follow-up measurements at 1 year lost 11.5±9.8 kg FFM by DXA, but only 1.3±2.5 kg of NHLT by BIS, suggesting that the FFM loss may have been mostly adipose tissue water. Incorporation of the Chamney model into BIS algorithms is a major conceptual advancement for assessing and monitoring body composition. Its ability to differentiate ICW and extracellular water (ECW) in NHLT and NHAT, as well as excess ECW is promising, and would facilitate lean tissue monitoring in obesity and acute/chronic disease.
31407839 Canine atopic dermatitis (cAD) is one the most common and distressing skin disorders seen in dogs. It is characterized by dysfunction in the skin barrier, with a complex pathogenesis combining both genetic and environmental factors. To evaluate associations between environmental factors and case-control status in two closely related, at-risk breeds, the Labrador retriever and golden retriever. Two thousand four hundred and forty-five pet dogs, of which 793 were classed as cases (575 Labrador and 218 golden retrievers) and 1,652 as controls (1,120 Labrador and 532 golden retrievers). Case-control status was assigned based upon owner response to a standardized validated questionnaire. Retrospective data on rearing environment were collected via additional questions. Univariate and multivariate logistic regressions were utilized to evaluate associations between environmental factors and case-control status. Risk factors included being reared in an urban environment (not living currently in an urban environment), being male, being neutered, receiving flea control and being allowed on upholstered furniture. Protective factors included living with other dogs (not cats) and walking in woodlands, fields or beaches. Additionally, amongst Labrador retrievers, chocolate-coloured dogs were at greater risk of having cAD than black- or yellow-coated dogs. This study is the largest of its kind to date to investigate the role of the environment in cAD. Although precise triggers are unclear, this study complements earlier studies in highlighting the protective role of a rural environment and some novel associations with disease development.
31410087 This paper presents results from the mammography quality plan of the National Breast Cancer Program at Argentina's National Cancer Institute, which focused on improving mammography quality in the public health-care sector and on using mammography to implement breast cancer screening. Plan implementation started in 2011, based on the premise that poor quality mammography impedes early diagnosis of breast cancer. At the time, there was little awareness in Argentina of the importance of quality control, and constant changes in lines of authority in the health system tended to hinder organized implementation of the program. The plan consisted of quality review and control of mammography facilities, training of technical and medical human resources, and implementation of an accreditation system for mammography services by the National Cancer Institute. Perception by involved personnel of the importance of quality improved; an overview was obtained of the state of mammography at the national level regarding quality, technology, quantity of equipment, and opportunities for implementation of screening; technical and medical personnel were trained using different methods; and standardization of mammography reading was promoted in the participating provinces.
31410088 Patient safety is challenging for health systems around the world, particularly in low-and middleincome countries such as Guatemala. The goal of this report is to summarize a strategic planning process for a national patient safety plan in Guatemala. This strategic planning process involved multiple stakeholders, including representatives of the Guatemala Ministry of Health and Social Assistance, medical leadership from across the public health system, and academic experts from Guatemala and the United States of America. We used mixed methods (quantitative and qualitative surveys) and a nominal group technique at a national symposium to prioritize patient safety challenges across Guatemala, and subsequent meetings to develop a national patient safety plan. This national patient safety plan outlines four domains to advance patient safety across the public hospital system over a five-year period in Guatemala: leadership and governance, training and awareness, safety culture, and outcome metrics. For each domain, we developed a set of goals, activities, outputs, and benchmarks to be overseen by the Ministry of Health. With this national patient safety plan, Guatemala has made a long-term commitment to improving patient safety across the public hospital system of Guatemala. Future efforts will require its extension to all levels of the Guatemalan health system.
31411271 This study aimed to investigate factors associated with orthostatic hypotension in 14,833 individuals 35-74 years of age. This was a cross-sectional study of baseline data (2008-2010) from the Longitudinal Study of Adult Health (ELSA-Brasil). Postural testing was performed after 20 minutes resting in supine position and active adoption of orthostatic posture. Blood pressure was measured in supine position and at 3 minutes in orthostatic position with an oscillometer (HEM 705 CP, Omron, São Paulo, Brazil). Orthostatic hypotension was defined as a drop of ≥ 20mmHg in systolic blood pressure and/or a drop of ≥ 10mmHg in diastolic blood pressure. The target covariates were sex, age bracket, race/color, schooling, nutritional status, waist circumference, alteration in the ankle-brachial index, pulse wave velocity, systolic and diastolic blood pressure, hypertension, diabetes, use of antihypertensives, cholesterol, triglycerides, Chagas disease serology, symptoms, and heart rate variation in the postural test, self-reported heart disease, acute myocardial infarction (AMI)/revascularization, and stroke. Orthostatic hypotension was significantly associated with higher age bracket, OR = 1.83 (95%CI: 1.14-2.95); alteration in the ankle-brachial index, OR = 2.8 (95%CI: 1.13-6.88); AMI/revascularization, OR = 1.70 (95%CI: 1.01-2.87); report of heart disease, OR = 3.03 (95%CI: 1.71-5.36); increased systolic blood pressure, OR = 1.012 (95%CI: 1.006-1.019); positive Chagas disease serology, OR = 2.29 (95%CI: 1.23-4.27); and occurrence of symptoms with postural change, OR = 20.81 (95%CI: 14.81-29.24). Presence of orthostatic hypotension can be a warning sign for cardiovascular disorders and thus a useful tool for screening and prevention.
31411282 The urban nexus approach involves the investigation and elucidation of integrated solutions through the recognition of tradeoffs between water, energy, and food, namely resources whose shortage leads to inequalities in health. The article's central hypothesis is that the context of shortage corroborates social practices that can be synergic or contradictory in relation to the challenges of sustainability and social rights. The objective is to investigate synergies and contradictions based on social practices in the urban nexus in the neighborhood of Novo Recreio in the city of Guarulhos, Greater Metropolitan São Paulo, Brazil. The methodology consists of a qualitative ethnographic study drawing on practice theory as the reference, with direct field observations and narratives. The results featured social practices associated with systematic lack of water, precarious public lighting and transportation, and difficult access to fresh and healthy foods. The study of social practices between synergies and contradictions allowed verifying that this spontaneous process of search for solutions to local problems reveals the need to incorporate local practices and knowledge into public policies and global demands. We define nexus of exclusion as the peripheral condition of impossibility of conscious options that allow jointly orienting the reduction of shortage and iniquities through alternatives for sustainability.
31411284 Despite the reduction in under-five mortality, the causes are still mostly avoidable, and survival may be compromised by life-threatening conditions at birth. The study estimated the burden of life-threatening conditions at birth, neonatal near miss, and mortality, with an emphasis on avoidable causes, as well as under-five survival in live birth cohorts. This was a retrospective cohort study of live birth in the city of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (2012-2016). The databases from the Brazilian Information System on Live Births and the Brazilian Mortality Information System were linked. Pragmatic criteria were used to define life-threatening conditions and near miss. Deaths were classified according to the Brazilian list of causes of avoidable deaths. Morbidity and mortality and survival indicators were estimated (Kaplan-Meier). Of the 425,505 live birth , 2.2% presented life-threatening conditions at birth. The under-five, infant and neonatal mortality rates were 0.01, 0.06, and 14.97 per 1,000 person-days, respectively. Avoidable, unclearly avoidable, and ill-defined causes accounted respectively for 61%, 35%, and 4% of the deaths. The risk of death from avoidable causes attributable to life-threatening conditions at birth was 97.6%. Survival was lower in newborns with life-threatening conditions compared to those without life-threatening conditions. The pragmatic criteria for life-threatening conditions determined the profile of proportional mortality by causes of death according to the three groups of causes in the Brazilian list of causes of avoidable deaths. Life-threatening conditions at birth increases the risk of morbidity and mortality in under-five children and raises the discussion on vulnerability and the need for care for these children and social support for their families.
31411303 In order to reform Portugal's primary health care (PHC), the Ministry of Health planned a change that was launched in 2005 and 2006, and which is still under way today. This article aims to analyze PHC reform in Portugal according to different phases in its development, using Kingdon's multiple streams model to reflect on the evolution in the reform process and its future, from the perspective of a process that seeks to achieve universal access to health. The working methodology was a document and case study with a qualitative approach and evaluative dimensions. The study was based on material on PHC in Portugal, published both in Portugal and elsewhere. Kingdon's multiple streams model was used to explain the actual and contextual development of policies implemented during the PHC reform. Three phases were identified in the reform, each lasting about five years. The first phase, starting in 2005, featured family health units with a voluntary basis. The second phase began in 2010, with the model's consolidation. In the third phase, since 2015 and still under way, the model came of age, benefiting from the end of the financial crisis but still suffering from its effects. The three reform cycles represent three distinct periods with consistency in the coalition that the policymaker was able to establish, in which the windows of opportunity for internally built change were heavily influenced by external factors. The article identifies the contribution by PHC reform to improvement of the Portuguese population's health status.
31411304 This study aimed to assess the performance of health surveillance regionalization with different levels of development in Brazil. A cross-sectional quantitative approach was used with data collected through a structured questionnaire, prepared on the basis of three study dimensions (Policy, Structure, and Organization), applied to 31 key actors in health surveillance in the selected Health Regions and municipalities. The measure of central tendency was mean score, and synthetic indices were obtained for each dimension and attribute. Three cutoff points were assigned to assess performance: values less than or equal to 4.99 were considered unsatisfactory; from 5.00 to 6.99, intermediate; and greater than or equal to 7.00, satisfactory. The study found that regionalization performance in health surveillance was only satisfactory in one region, intermediate in four, and unsatisfactory in one. Among the three dimensions, Policy and Organization showed the best performance and Structure showed the worst. In conclusion, in general, the higher the level of socioeconomic development and services supply, the better the performance in regionalization of health surveillance. The evaluation portrays the complexity of contexts in different regions of Brazil, thus contributing to understanding the dynamics of health surveillance regionalization in Brazil.
31411306 The article aims to analyze physicians' commuting from a new perspective, verifying their movement and work supply between health regions, specifically in five regions in the state of São Paulo, Brazil. This movement was referred to as physicians' commuting, defined as the diversity of job situations over the course of a given time period in given geographic territories. The methodology used was a multiple case study with quantitative and qualitative approaches. All the physicians registered in the National Registry of Healthcare Establishment (CNES) in March 2015 were categorized as either 'exclusive physicians', with employment contracts exclusively in the target health region or 'non-exclusive physicians', with employment contracts both in that region and in other regions. We analyzed the region's socioeconomic and health characteristics and healthcare structure. The region's dependence on external physicians, namely those residing in other regions, varied from 30 to 40%; dependence was higher in the more economically developed regions and less in the less developed regions. Internal dependence, among municipalities, was close to 40% in the regions with higher economic development and reached 60% in the less developed regions. Non-exclusive physicians tended to be more specialized, working more in surgical and diagnostic specialties, while exclusive physicians worked more in basic and clinical specialties, suggesting that the commuting patterns are associated with the organization of different arrangements of healthcare provision. We identified a growing share of outsourced arrangements and the importance of regionally negotiated actions. Such studies can better orient more integrated redistributive policies.
32437073 On 5 November 2015, the Samarco Fe ore mining operations released approximately 50 million cubic meters of mining waste into the environment, due to a dam collapse. Aiming at understanding the potential effects on the Doce River, different regions of the course of tailings were monitored using acute and chronic ecotoxicological tests with 4 species: Ceriodaphnia dubia, Daphnia similis, Danio rerio, and Vibrio fischeri. The results showed no acute toxicity for water column organisms. However, chronic toxicity was observed with the tests with the microcrustacean C. dubia, mainly related to the physical effects of the passage of flood wave and increased suspended solids, given that toxicity was reduced after filtering the samples. The results showed different magnitudes of impact among the upper, middle, and lower Doce River, with greater impact close to the dam failure area. Integr Environ Assess Manag 2020;16:608-614. © 2020 SETAC.
32440293 To inform about the most recent epidemiological trends and integrated programmatic response to tuberculosis (TB) and HIV coinfection in Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC). A descriptive review analyzed the most relevant indicators on TB/HIV coinfection in 33 countries in LAC with a cross-sectional and time-trend approach. Data were obtained from publicly available databases and analyzed through simple proportions, weighted means, and risk ratios. In LAC, during 2017, 80.8% of TB patients were actively screened for HIV, with a 25.6% increase between 2011 and 2017. In the same year, the proportion of TB patients with HIV-positive status was 11.2%, with a small but progressive reduction of 5% since 2011. The provision of antiretroviral therapy and anti-TB medication among TB/HIV coinfected patients for 2017 was at 60%. Only one-third of people living with HIV had access to isoniazid preventive therapy. Overall, the mortality in the TB/HIV cohort has not changed since 2012, hovering at around 20%. TB/HIV collaborative activities, as the backbone to address TB/HIV coinfection, are being scaled up in LAC and some indicators show a tendency toward improvement; nevertheless, our review shed light on the need to keep strengthening integration of service delivery, joint monitoring and evaluation, and data quality.
32441882 The debris flood created by the 5 November 2015 failure of the Fundão dam in Brazil injected a large amount of fine sediment in the Gualaxo do Norte River system. Although coarse and sand-sized sediment injections in rivers have been studied in relative detail, little is known about river response to overloading of mud-sized sediments (consisting of clay and silt). This paper presents an assessment of suspended sediment transport occurring in and along the Gualaxo do Norte River after the Fundão dam failure to contribute to the general understanding of how rivers recover following large inputs of mud-sized sediments (consisting of clay and silt). The average total sediment removal estimated based on the last 2 rainy periods is 54 466 tonnes, ranging from 37 385 to 71 546 tonnes according to the uncertainty analysis. The sediment transport analysis suggests that the Gualaxo do Norte River is returning to its pre-event morphological character in terms of sediment transport. However, the morphologic recovery of the system has been constrained in recent years by decreased stream power, the result of moderate wet seasons and limited large flood events. We anticipate that future larger flood events will transport most of the remaining available in-channel tailings, speeding up the physical morphologic recovery of the Gualaxo do Norte River, which is a key component of improving water quality and eventually the river ecology. Although the proposed approach for the sediment budget is simplified and has limitations and uncertainties, it provides a scientific basis to explain the natural fluvial processes that have been occurring in the river system. The approach used for the sediment budget presented in this paper could be applied to similar cases with limited data. Integr Environ Assess Manag 2020;16:572-582. © 2020 SETAC.
32454806 Italy and South Korea have two distinctly different healthcare systems, causing them to respond to public health crises such as the COVID-19 pandemic in markedly different ways. Differences exist in medical education for both countries, allowing South Korean medical graduates to have a more holistic education in comparison to their Italian counterparts, who specialize in medical education earlier on. Additionally, there are fewer South Korean physicians per 1000 people in South Korea compared to Italian physicians per 1000 people in Italy. However, both countries have a national healthcare system with universal healthcare coverage. Despite this underlying similarity, the two countries addressed COVID-19 in nearly opposite manners. South Korea employed technology and the holistic education of its physician community, despite having a smaller proportion of physicians in society, to its advantage by implementing efficacious drive-through centers that test suspected individuals rapidly and with little to no contact with healthcare staff, decreasing the possibility of transmission of COVID-19. Conversely, Italy is presently considered the epicenter of the outbreak in Europe and has recorded the highest death toll of any country outside of mainland China. This is partially due to the reactionary nature of Italy's public health measures compared to South Korea's proactive response. The different healthcare responses of South Korea and Italy can inform decisions made by public health bodies in other countries, especially in countries across the Americas, which can selectively adopt policies that have worked in curtailing the spread of COVID-19 and learn from mistakes made by both countries.
32454807 To describe perinatal and neonatal outcomes in newborns exposed to SARS-CoV-2. A systematic review was conducted by searching PubMed Central, LILACS, and Google Scholar using the keywords 'covid ' AND 'newborn' OR 'child' OR 'infant,' on 18 March 2020, and again on 17 April 2020. One researcher conducted the search and extracted data on demographics, maternal outcomes, diagnostic tests, imaging, and neonatal outcomes. Of 256 publications identified, 20 met inclusion criteria and comprised neonatal outcome data for 222 newborns whose mothers were suspected or confirmed to be SARS-CoV-2 positive perinatally (17 studies) or of newborns referred to hospital with infection/pneumonia (3 studies). Most (12 studies) were case-series reports; all were from China, except three (Australia, Iran, and Spain). Of the 222 newborns, 13 were reported as positive for SARS-CoV-2; most of the studies reported no or mild symptoms and no adverse perinatal outcomes. Two papers among those from newborns who tested positive reported moderate or severe clinical characteristics. Five studies using data on umbilical cord blood, placenta, and/or amniotic fluid reported no positive results. Nine studies reported radiographic imaging, including 5 with images of pneumonia, increased lung marking, thickened texture, or high-density nodular shadow. Minor, non-specific changes in biochemical variables were reported. Studies that tested breast milk reported negative SARS-CoV-2 results. Given the paucity of studies at this time, vertical transmission cannot be confirmed or denied. Current literature does not support abstaining from breastfeeding nor separating mothers and newborns. Further evidence and data collection networks, particularly in the Americas, are needed for establishing definitive guidelines and recommendations.
32454808 A rapid systematic review was carried out to evaluate the current evidence related to the presence of SARS-CoV-2 in breast milk from pregnant women with COVID-19. Eight studies analyzing the presence of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in the breast milk of 24 pregnant women with COVID-19 during the third trimester of pregnancy were found. All patients had fever and/or symptoms of acute respiratory illness and chest computed tomography images indicative of COVID-19 pneumonia. Most pregnant women had cesarean delivery (91.7%) and two neonates had low birthweight (< 2 500 g). Biological samples collected immediately after birth from upper respiratory tract (throat or nasopharyngeal) of neonates and placental tissues showed negative results for the presence SARS-CoV-2 by RT-PCR test. No breast milk samples were positive for SARS-CoV-2 and, to date, there is no evidence on the presence of SARS-CoV-2 in breast milk of pregnant women with COVID-19. However, data are still limited and breastfeeding of women with COVID-19 remains a controversial issue. There are no restrictions on the use of milk from a human breast milk bank.
32935737 Atrial high-rate episodes (AHREs) are associated with an increased risk of cerebral ischemic events; however, there are no studies related to the presence of AHREs and cerebral ischemic events in Chagasic patients. To investigate the association between the presence of AHREs ≥ 6 minutes and cerebral ischemic events in Chagasic patients. Cohort study with Chagasic patients with implantable electronic cardiac devices (IECDs), followed at the Arrhythmia Outpatient Clinic of a University Hospital, in the city of Salvador, state of Bahia, Brazil, between May 2016 and June 2017.. Patients diagnosed with atrial flutter / atrial fibrillation, with unicameral IECD and using oral anticoagulation were excluded. AHREs with atrial frequency ≥ 190 beats per minute and duration ≥ 6 minutes (min) were considered, and cerebral ischemic events were identified by computed tomography (CT) of the skull. The 67 research participants (67.2% females, mean age 63.6 ± 9.2 years) were followed for 98 ± 28.8 days and 11.9% of the patients had AHREs ≥ 6 min. Skull CT showed silent cerebral ischemic events in 16.4% of the patients, 63.6% of whom had AHREs ≥ 6 min in the analysis of IECDs. Advanced age [OR 1.12 (95% CI 1.03-1.21; p=0.009] and the presence of AHREs ≥ 6 minutes [OR 96.2 (95% CI 9.4-987.4; p <0.001)] were independent predictors for ischemic events. AHREs detected by IECDs were associated with the presence of silent cerebral ischemic events in Chagasic patients. (Arq Bras Cardiol. 2020; [online].ahead print, PP.0-0).
33129219 To identify clinical, microscopic, and biochemical characteristics that differentiate cytolytic vaginosis (CV) from vulvovaginal candidiasis (VVC).  The present cross-sectional study analyzed the vaginal contents of 24 non-pregnant women aged 18 to 42 years who were attended at the Genital Infections Clinic at Centro de Atenção Integral à Saúde da Mulher da Universidade Estadual de Campinas (CAISM-UNICAMP). They were diagnosed either with (CV = 8, VVC = 8) or without vulvovaginitis or vaginal dysbiosis (controls). The socio-demographic, clinical, and gynecological data were obtained from a detailed patient interview. Samples of the vaginal contents were collected for analysis of vaginal pH, gram stain, and specific fungal culture. The Kruskal-Wallis and Fisher exact tests were used to compare the differences between the groups. Odds ratios were used to compare the categorical variables. The significance level was considered at <i>p</i> < 0.05.  Both women with CV and VVC had a lumpy vaginal discharge (<i>p</i> = 0,002) and vaginal hyperemia (<i>p</i> = 0.001), compared with controls. The inflammatory process was more intense in the VVC group (<i>p</i> = 0.001). In the CV group, there was statistical significance for the lactobacillus amount (<i>p</i> = 0.006), vaginal epithelium lysis (<i>p</i> = 0.001), and vaginal pH (<i>p</i> = 0.0002).  Cytolytic vaginosis and VVC diagnoses rarely differ on clinical characteristics but have different laboratorial findings. The present study highlights the importance of conducting an accurate investigation through laboratory tests rather than clinical criteria to avoid misdiagnosis.
33603565 Several different approaches have been developed to model the specific characteristics of karst aquifers, taking account of their inherent complex spatial and temporal heterogeneities. This paper sets out the development of a semidistributed modelling approach for applications in an Irish karst context using urban drainage software. The models have proven to be very useful for different studies, with examples given for the ecohydrology of ephemeral karst lakes, extreme groundwater-flood alleviation, karst network investigation, submarine groundwater discharge, and quantification of different recharge and flow components. The limitations of the approach are also highlighted, in particular not being able to simulate diffuse infiltration and flow paths explicitly across the groundwater catchment. Hence, a more distributed, finite-difference modelling approach using MODFLOW Unstructured Grid (USG) with the newly developed Connected Linear Network (CLN) process is then compared against the semidistributed approach on the same karst catchment. Whilst it has proven difficult to achieve the same levels of model performance in simulating the spring flows in the distributed model compared to the semidistributed model, the ability to interrogate the flow paths at any point on the three-dimensional aquifer is demonstrated, which can give new insights into flows (and potential contaminant transport) through such complex systems. The influence of the proximity of highly transmissive conduits on the flow dynamics through the much-lower transmissive matrix cells in which the network is embedded has been particularly investigated.
33605304 To describe the methodological and operational aspects of an epidemiological and an evaluation of Rede Cegonha in Santa Catarina, Brazil. The research carried out in 2019 was composed of two sub-studies. Regarding the first, whose design was epidemiological and analyzed prenatal, delivery and immediate puerperium care addressed to pregnant women, puerperal women and children assisted at SUS, the instruments used for data collection and the organization of the field of the study are described. The other sub-study was a normative assessment of municipal management in prenatal and postpartum care within the scope of Rede Cegonha. It began with an evaluability assessment followed by the assessment itself. The different methodological strategies adopted are described, with the involvement of stakeholders and experts. The response rate of the epidemiological sub-study was 97.7%. Women residing in 82.7% of Santa Catarina's municipalities were interviewed. The sample was similar to that registered in SINASC for the same period, and the characteristics of the sub-sample interviewed after six months was similar to the global sample. The evaluation study improved and applied a model with 32 indicators that allowed to analyze the municipalities considering the political-organizational and tactical-operational aspects. Two hundred and four municipalities answered the questionnaire (69.1%); they were evaluated according to their respective population size. The availability of methodological procedures of studies that articulate epidemiological and evaluation methods allows generating more accurate and complete information and contribute with the design and evaluation of health policies, programs and actions.
33605316 The aim of the study was to find out how community participation occurs within the scope of professional training of municipal health councilors through educational workshops and concept maps. This is a research-action, qualitative study, developed in three municipalities belonging to the Health Region of Cuesta Pole, São Paulo, Brazil, with 28 councilors. Educational workshops and concept maps were carried out and data were analyzed according to the dialogic thematic analysis and semiotic image analysis. The discussion was supported by the Significant Learning Theory. The results showed the importance of the Primary Health Care regarding qualified listening and health promotion and prevention actions. For the participants, exercising the role of councilor means being present at meetings and representing their segment to the population. They feel important as collaborators in the creation of public policies and assistance to other governing bodies related to budgetary and fiscal control. Educational workshops and concept maps were shown to be pedagogical strategies to be worked with health councilors, as they allowed moments of learning, exchanges of experiences, interaction and creation of bonds.
33605317 To understand the meanings attributed by Primary Health Care workers to the professional training process in Integrative and Complementary Practices. Descriptive, exploratory study with a qualitative approach, carried out with 20 professionals from 14 health units in three municipalities in the Metropolitan Region of Goiânia, state of Goiás, Brazil. Data were collected through semi-structured interviews, transcribed and analyzed using the thematic content analysis. Based on the analysis, the thematic category about training trajectories in Integrative and Complementary Practices emerged. It discusses that the training takes place through training provided by federal and municipal management or professional councils, via distance, semi-presential learning or in-person training. Furthermore, training courses are held at private educational institutions funded by the professionals themselves. Additionally, informal sources of information are used to obtain knowledge (internet, books and magazines). The results show, on the one hand, insufficient and diffuse training, with limited supply and quality and, on the other hand, the need to increase educational strategies to improve the training of health professionals aiming at providing different Integrative and Complementary Practices in the Primary Health Care.
33605318 In order to understand the communication strategy adopted by the Ministry of Health to prevent diseases caused by Aedes and to analyze the perception of the community regarding the videos on dengue, chikungunya and Zika aired between 2014 and 2017, a qualitative analysis was performed based on an in-depth interview with a key informant from the Ministry of Health Communication Center and conversation circles with the community in four Brazilian regions. The strategy adopted by the Ministry relies on the Hypodermic Needle Theory due to financial and logistical issues, but the analyzed campaigns did not reach the majority of participants in the circles. The latter consider that the most important information in prevention campaigns is related to care and not possible sequelae, different from what was affirmed by the key informant. The community considers the regionalization and the approach of socio-environmental, cultural and economic characteristics to be important, but the Ministry of Health does not consider the regionalization of campaigns to be effective. It is concluded that the videos do not meet the needs of the population and should be used in an integrated manner with other types of information, education and communication actions in health for effective disease control.
33605319 Despite the difficulties in living their sexualities, the sexual education of autistic people is often neglected. In this sense, this research aims to identify autistic people's demands on their sexualities, in line with the neurodiversity paradigm. This qualitative research was carried out from September 2017 to October 2018, with 14 autistic children aged 15 to 17 enrolled in regular schools. Data were collected by semi-structured interviews and analyzed according to the thematic content analysis. Two analytical categories were identified: 'discursive processes and the 'blue angel' imagery'; and 'diversity in diversity: the sexuality of autistic people as singular processes'. The results show that, while autistic people grow physically and sexually according to the typical development stages, some singularities should not be ignored. However, the construction of false beliefs encourages the denial of autistic people's sexuality. We can conclude that the establishment of effective actions of sexual education and support to the sexuality of the autistic person requires a paradigmatic change anchored in the social model of disability.
33605320 The recognition of health needs is essential to develop public actions and policies. to analyze the recognition and the meeting of the health needs of adolescents, from the perspective of Primary Health Care professionals. qualitative, exploratory and descriptive study, which analyzed 15 interviews with Primary Health Care professionals of the III Health District in the municipality of Recife, state of Pernambuco, Brazil, who have worked in Primary Health Care for a year or more. Content analysis was performed using the webQDA software. five empirical categories emerged: Adolescent and adolescence, Individual and social group needs, Political and normative organization, Professional, team and intersectoral actions and Potentials and limits in adolescent care. The concept of adolescence is based on stereotypes and a fragile articulation to social, economic, political and historical contexts. The professionals recognize the demands compatible with the Primary Care programmatic actions as needs, but they do not have enough instruments to deal with the group peculiarities. The absence of goals in the Municipal Health Plan equals adolescents to other social groups and offers them the same menu of needs.
33605321 To understand the meaning of the experiences of children living in a shelter through therapeutic play. Descriptive, qualitative study, carried out in a non-governmental philanthropic shelter located in the city of Santos (SP) - Brazil. The sample was composed of five children between four and 11 years old, who agreed to participate in the study and were also authorized by their legal guardian. Observation during a dramatic therapeutic play session was the strategy used for data collection. Data were analyzed using Bardin's content analysis technique. Six categories emerged from the data, highlighting aspects of the child's daily life in the shelter and at school, as well as the nostalgia for family and the way they deal with fear in the shelter. It is also worth mentioning the constant attempt to obtain the approval of the adult and the contentment experience while playing with this adult. The therapeutic play allowed the children to reflect on their experiences and have moments of catharsis. For the adult, it was possible to understand how it is to live in a shelter and the challenges faced by the children in this context.
33605322 The study analyses the understanding of parents or guardians of children aged zero to five years old about fever, the conduct and care for this condition, carried out in the urgent and emergency service. The qualitative research, which used the thematic analysis technique, was carried out through interviews with 14 parents or guardians who sought an urgent and emergency Pediatric Service in a municipality in the countryside of São Paulo for this reason. The experiences of parents who seek these services are associated to three main topics: fear of fever; care for a febrile child; and the experience of care at the urgent and emergency services. It was identified that an exaggerated fear of fever predominates and that parents / guardians feel safe regarding the existing technology found in urgent and emergency services. The adopted precautions, however, are not always those recommended for the existing situation.
33605323 Health education must be seen as an instrument used to promote quality of life. The objective of this study was to evaluate health education practices of nutritionists in a municipal health network. This is a qualitative study using Grounded Theory. Interviews and observation of educational activities were carried out. The use of materials was evaluated, together with attempts to engage the service users. Five analysis categories were applied. The intention of raising awareness and changing habits highlights the preference of professionals toward actions that are articulated and consistent with reality. Productivity valorization, insufficient training, and lack of physical structure were mentioned as restrictions. Most respondents did not evaluate results; they believe in sharing knowledge as a process that transforms reality; and defend the multidisciplinary approach and care by putting the concepts of integrality and equity into practice. The nutritionists' concepts of health education guide their professional performance, as they reflect the perspectives of the educational practices adopted.
33605324 Becoming a father requires a process of personal development, inner reorientation, and adaptation to a new role. The literature on this process has been sparse, devaluing how challenging and problematic the transition to becoming a father can be. This qualitative, exploratory, descriptive, cross-sectional and retrospective study sought to understand the experiences of men in the transition to fatherhood during the prenatal period. It included a sample of 10 men experiencing, for the first time, a partner's pregnancy. The data collection technique used was semi-structured interviews. The content analysis technique with semantic categorization and an inductive approach was used to analyze the data. As a result, 3 topics emerged: 'experiencing the transition,' 'development of the father identity' and '(de)constructing bridges for the transition'. This study deepens the understanding of this developmental transition and challenges the restructuring of prenatal care towards the inclusion of the father figure.
33605325 A pedagogical activity with Master's Degree and Postgraduate students in Maternal Health and Obstetrics Nursing is described, applying principles of simulated practice in perineal suturing after delivery. This procedure causes a lot of insecurity and generates great anxiety in the students, when they start the internship in a delivery room. to develop the psychomotor skills in students for perineal surgical reconstruction; increase students' self-confidence to perform the procedure. qualitative, with 2 moments of data collection applied to two courses. Questionnaire with open questions, focus group session and filming. Content analysis of the answers to the questions and verbatim of the focus group. a close relationship was observed between simulation and skills development. the students emphasized the importance of the pedagogical activity in the acquisition of suturing skills, improving their self-confidence and reducing the initial anxiety. The use of the qualitative research allowed identifying the impact of the simulated practice on the development of the students' skills and to identify aspects to be improved, contributing to the progress of pedagogical practices.
33605326 Evaluating health-related applications is necessary for their adequacy and dissemination in society. The GestAção application was evaluated based on the opinion of 13 pregnant women followed up in prenatal care consultations at three public health services and at a private institution in Fortaleza, Ceará, Brazil. Data emerged from an evaluation carried out from June to December 2017, including semi-structured interviews. Data were analyzed from content analysis in thematic and semiotic modality. Thus, the theme 'meanings attributed to the application by pregnant women' emerged, which is associated with the following cores of meaning: provision of safe and diverse information; possibility of changing behavior and motivations for using the application. It is considered that semiotics allowed to understand the meanings attributed to the application from the interaction of pregnant women with the tool. The GestAção application was considered satisfactory, motivating to use, informative, safe and promoter of changes in the context of gestational health. Participants' views allow the evaluated technology to compose strategies aimed at promoting health care for pregnant women.
33605327 Blood donation is a social practice that helps treat diseases and maintain public health. The DoeSangue application was designed and developed to support donor recruitment and loyalty, strengthening health promotion and social engagement. We aimed to assess the DoeSangue application from the perspective of hematology and hemotherapy experts. A methodological, applied and qualitative research was carried out from September 2015 to July 2017 in Fortaleza, Ceará. The study was based on Participatory Interaction Design associated with Symbolic Interactionism. After conducting the first two steps, application design and development in a laboratory and assessment by donor users, the application was validated by eight experts from the Fortaleza's public blood center. For data collection, the 'application validation form with experts' was used based on a Likert-type scale, and a focus group was conducted. The tool was positively assessed by participants, with an average Content Validation Index of 0.88. Evaluators pointed out, among other features, the tool's ability to promote interactivity, mobilization and social engagement, in addition to contributing to gathering and loyalty of blood donors.
33605328 Nursing information systems, where quality indicators are integrated, focus on the standardization of health records and the consequent visibility of the provided care. Despite the acknowledged importance of the contributions of information systems, their implementation has been characterized by several challenges, so we propose to reflect on them. To identify the evidence available in the literature on these same challenges, a narrative review of the literature was developed, with the analysis of relevant articles and reports on this issue. It is clear in the literature the importance of information systems for obtaining quality indicators that are sensitive to nursing care, with a positive impact on the quality of care, allowing for measurable quality in interventions, as well as facilitating inter and intra-institutional comparability, in real-time or in a retrospective analysis. The challenges encountered and which urgently needs to be resolved in clinical practice are related to the difficulty for professionals to perceive the impact of computer records, the visibility of nursing indicators and the time that is allocated in the context of providing care to carry out these records.
33605329 In a more inductive or deductive way, several theorists have problematized about nursing care in which they seek to clarify nursing science focus of attention. The phenomenological perspective allows us to perceive the human lived experience and unveil their meaningful understanding as a person. Stemming from the question 'What is the lived transition experience of the maternal role of women with problems of addiction to psychoactive substances, from pregnancy to the first year of the child's life?' This research distills the core principles of a qualitative research, with a phenomenological and interpretative design, with the objective of understanding the lived experience transition process of the maternal role of women with problems psychoactive substances addition. The research does not only reveal the contribution of phenomenological studies in the development of nursing science, but also enhances the living experience of women with addiction problems to psychoactive substances, during pregnancy, childbirth, postpartum and the first year of their children's life, enabling nurses to develop specific interventions to dealt with this problematic issue under study.
33605330 This is a scoping review of which objective was to identify and to map the use of photography as a data collection technique in qualitative research in the health area. The research was guided by the recommendations of the Joanna Briggs Institute and presented according to the recommendations of PRISMA Extension for Scoping Reviews. Qualitative studies in the health area that used photography as a data collection technique were included. In December 2018, data were collected from 12 databases, including articles, dissertations and theses. The data were analyzed using simple descriptive statistics. The final sample consisted of 138 studies, published between 2001 and 2018, from 21 countries. Articles written by nursing researchers predominated in the sample. The main data collection techniques included photovoice, photo-elicitation and photography, mainly through the participation of adults and children. It was concluded that the main benefits of the photographic method are related to the encouragement of reflection and creativity, the break with formality during the interviews, the capture of subjective impressions and meanings and the strengthening of the participants' engagement in the research.
33605331 This study aimed to evaluate the prevalence of prediabetes and intermediate hyperglycemia in Brazilian adults, according to different diagnostic criteria, and establish associated factors to its occurrence. We analyzed the National Health Survey laboratory data collected from 2014 to 2015. The prevalence of the conditions was calculated according to the American Diabetes Association (ADA) diagnostic criteria based on glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) 5.7%-6.4%, and the World Health Organization (WHO) 6-6.4%, among those without criteria for diabetes. Crude and adjusted prevalence rates (PR) and 95% CI were calculated using Poisson regression with robust variance. The prevalence of prediabetes by ADA and WHO criteria was 18.5 and 7.5%, respectively. We observed a gradient of increased prevalence by the age of the population and risk factors, like arterial hypertension, obesity, elevated waist circumference, and low HDL cholesterol levels. Less educated people and the self-declared black had a higher prevalence. This study pointed out a range from 7.5 to 18.5% of Brazilian adults with prediabetes and intermediate hyperglycemia and identified a risk score to this condition's occurrence.
33605332 The study analyzed factors associated with high LDL-Cholesterol in Brazilian population. This is a cross-sectional study with laboratory data from 8,534 individuals collected in National Health Survey were analyzed. The prevalence levels of LDL-Cholesterol <130 and ≥ 130 mg/dL were calculated. The outcome variable was high LDL-Cholesterol (≥ 130 mg/dL) and explanatory variables were sociodemographic, anthropometric, lifestyle, chronic diseases and self-rated health. To Poisson regression was used and estimated prevalence ratios (PR) with 95% confidence levels (CI) to verify associations. The prevalence of high LDL-Cholesterol was 18.58%. In the final multivariate model were associated with the outcome: 30 to 44 years (PR 1.99; CI 1.58-2.54), 45 to 59 years (PR 2.89; CI 2.29-3.64), 60 years or more (PR 2.90; CI 2.29-3.68), living in the Northeast Region (PR 1.16; CI 1.02 - 1.32), overweight (PR 1.32; CI 1.15-1.51), obesity (PR 1.41; CI 1.19-1.65) or anemia (PR 0.66; CI 0.54-0.80). The LDL-Cholesterol was associated with aging, overweight, obesity, live in the Northeast and anemia. The monitoring of LDL levels is relevant, due to the increased risk with age, and can guide the adopting healthy lifestyles and diagnosis in places with lower access.
33605333 This paper aims to identify the factors associated with high salt intake in the Brazilian adult population. This is a cross-sectional study with 8,083 adults participating in the National Health Survey (PNS, 2014/15). Salt intake was based on the estimation of 24-hour urinary sodium calculated from the sodium/creatinine ratio in spot urine samples. The highest quartile of the distribution was considered high salt intake. The relationship between high salt consumption and sociodemographic factors, lifestyles, morbidity, and self-rated health status was analyzed by calculating the crude prevalence ratios and the prevalence ratios adjusted for age and gender. Approximately 28.1% had an estimated salt intake higher than 10.56 g/day. Overweight (Adjusted Prevalence Ratio; 95%CI - PRadj 1.23; 1.09-1.39), obesity (PRadj 1.61; 1.43-1.83), and diabetes (PRadj 1.36; 1.17-1.58) were positively associated with high salt intake. Female gender (PRadj 0.73; 0.66-0.80), high schooling level (PRadj 0.88; 0.79-0.99), living in the North and chronic kidney disease (PRadj 0.71; 0.56-0.90) were protective factors. Salt consumption is elevated nationwide and in all population subgroups, requiring coordinated actions.
33605334 The scope of this study was to assess the association between parental supervision and sedentary behavior and physical inactivity among Brazilian adolescents. Data of 102,072 students attending 9th grade from public and private school gathered in the 2015 Brazilian National Survey of School Health (PeNSE) were used. Adolescents were sedentary and physical inactive when they spent ≥3 hours/day sitting and practiced less then 60min/day of physical activity, respectively. Frequency of parental supervision (never, sometimes, always) was assessed through checking school homework, knowledge about what the adolescents do in their free time and understanding their problems. Logistic regression was applied and duly adjusted for sociodemographic variables. Among the adolescents, 56.3% were sedentary and 78.1% were inactive. Checking school homework was associated with lower odds of physical inactivity and sedentary behavior. Knowing what adolescents did in their free time and inspecting their belongings was associated with lower odds of physical inactivity. The understanding of problems by parents/guardians was associated with lower odds of sedentary behavior. The conclusion drawn is that greater parental supervision is associated with less physical inactivity and less sedentary behavior.
33605336 This article aims to evaluate the coverage and inequalities in prenatal assistance. Data from the Brazilian National Health Survey cross-sectional study in 2013. Prenatal assistance assessed through indicators: counseling, guidance received, procedures, and exams performed during the pregnancy. An asset index constructed, the Slope Index of Inequality (SII) and Concentration Index (CIX) were used to measure. About 90% received counseling on healthy eating, not smoking and drinking, 80% not to use dye/hair straightening, and all the advice. Approximately 70% received guidance on delivery and signs of risk and 83.4% for breastfeeding and 60% all the guidelines. About 80% had the measure of pressure and weight checked, the measure of the abdomen and the auscultation of the heart of the baby, only 36.7% had their breasts examined e 33.4% all procedures performed. More than 90% held for HIV and urine and 77.9% for syphilis, 81.4% of women have carried out all the exams and 21.7% all the indicators. No significant absolute differences (SII) found. CIX evidenced in counseling for healthy eating and guidance for breastfeeding. There were no marked inequalities in prenatal assistance.
33605337 The scope of this study was to estimate the frequency of sleep-related problems and associated factors. It was a study based on data from the National Health Survey conducted in Brazil in 2013. Sleep-related problems were assessed with the question 'How often have you had sleep problems in the last two weeks, such as difficulty falling asleep, waking up frequently during the night or sleeping more than usual?' The answers were grouped into: none of the days, less than half of the days and more than half of the days. Of the individuals evaluated, 71.1% reported having no problems with sleep on any day, 14.0% on at least half of the days and 14.9% on more than half of the days. The highest frequencies of sleep-related problems were reported by women and more advanced age. For men and women, smoking, alcohol abuse, physical inactivity, sedentary behavior, and high blood pressure were significantly associated with the frequency of sleep problems on more than half of the days, and also excess weight for women. Thus, the frequency of sleep-related problems in the Brazilian population was high. Women, older individuals with lifestyle-related risk behaviors, high blood pressure, and overweight were the highest risk subgroups.
33605338 The objective of this article was to analyze the association between physical violence in students with socioeconomic factors, family context, mental health, individual risky behaviors, and unsafe environment. Study with data from the National School Health Survey (NSHS) in 2015, with 9th graders. The outcome variable was the report of involvement in a physical struggle and the associated exposure variables used were related to socioeconomic and demographic conditions, family supervision and support, mental health, risky behaviors, and unsafe environment. Multivariate logistic regression with a hierarchical approach was used in the analyzes. The prevalence of involvement in a fight was higher in boys (30.2%; CI 29.3-31.0) than in girls (16.7%; CI 16.0-17.4). In both genders, there was a greater chance of involvement with physical violence when using drugs, missing classes, sedentary lifestyle, insomnia, loneliness and insecurity at school or in the community and, especially, when victimized by family aggression, OR 2.59 (CI 2.31-2.90) in boys and girls OR 2.42 (CI 2.17-2.71). There was a reduction in the chance of involvement in physical violence in boys because they were working and, in girls, when they study in a private school, having their problems and concerns welcomed by their parents or their participation in school activities.
33605339 The scope of this paper was to identify patterns of food consumption and associated factors among children under two years of age in Brazil. It involved a cross-sectional, population-based study using data from the National Health Survey conducted in 2013. Food consumption was measured by dichotomous questions, listing the food ingested solely on the day prior to the interview. The patterns were identified through principal component analysis. Poisson regression was used to obtain a crude and adjusted prevalence ratio. The sample design effect was considered in the analyses that were stratified according to age. Among the 5,052 children, three patterns were identified, being defined as: a 'healthy food consumption pattern,' a 'milk consumption pattern' and an 'unhealthy food consumption pattern.' There was an association between the patterns in each age group, mainly related to skin color, gender, schooling of the head of the family, area of residence and region. A quarter of the children from 12 to 23 months consumed soft drinks, more than a third drank artificial juices and almost half ate candies the day before the interview. Three dietary patterns were identified, besides observing early food ingestion among children under six months of age.
33605340 The scope of this study was to evaluate the acceptance of school food by Brazilian adolescents, taking individual and school context determinants into consideration. A total of 10,262 adolescents in public schools of the 2015 Brazilian National Survey of School Health (PeNSE 2015) were assessed. Multilevel regression was used to estimate the effect of variables of the individual context and the school environment on low acceptance of school food by adolescents. The prevalence of low acceptance (consumption of school meals ≤ 2 days/week) was 64.2% in this group. The explanatory model showed less acceptance of this practice among female adolescents (PR=1.09; CI: 1.03-1.14), among those aged 15 years or older (PR=1.08; CI: 1.02-1.14), those who regularly consumed soft drinks (PR=1.09; CI: 1.03-1.15), those who did not regularly have lunch and dinner with parents and guardians (PR=1.08; CI: 1.02-1.14), and those who lived in households with less than 4 people (PR=1.07; CI: 1.02-1.13). Concerning the school environment, studying in schools with more than 1,000 students (PR=1.22; CI: 1.12-1.33) and the presence of a cafeteria (PR=1.15; CI: 1.08-1.22) led to low acceptance. The results revealed the importance of the school context in determining the consumption of school meals by adolescents.
33605341 In Brazil, within the SUS, Primary Health Care (PHC) gained relevance from the Family Health Strategy's structuring from the 1990s to the 2000s. Several instruments are available in the world to evaluate PHC services, including the family of instruments of the Primary Care Assessment Tool (PCAT), developed and disseminated by Starfield & Shi to assess the existence and extent of the features of primary health care services. Reinforcing the importance of using this instrument in Brazil, the Ministry of Health published in 2020 a new edition of the Brazilian version that informs the methodology used for such instruments, reviving the role of IBGE as a significant external evaluator of the SUS. The IBGE pioneered in its primary household random sample survey, the National Health Survey, a question-based module of the reduced version of the PCAT for adult users. The leading global results found for Brazil (overall PCAT score=5.9) inform that those who use PHC services (adults with referred morbidities) the most are also those who evaluate these services most positively. Differences were also observed among the residents of households registered by the family health teams, those receiving visits from the community and endemic workers, and age groups (older people evaluate services more positively).
33605342 The scope of the study was to investigate the relationship between COVID-19 and social vulnerability variables in Fortaleza, as well as to verify the influence of violence on the work of the Community Health Worker (ACS) and the implications for tackling COVID-19. Primary quantitative data (e.g., questionnaires with the ACS) and secondary data (e.g., HDI, homicide, illiteracy, Bolsa Família [PBF] coverage and Family Health Strategy [ESF] coverage) were used. There was a relationship between COVID-19 and indicators of social vulnerability, where cases had a negative relationship with HDI and illiteracy; and deaths had a positive relationship with the homicide rate and PBF coverage. Regions with high death rates due to COVID-19 and social vulnerability have greater FHS coverage and less home visits by the CHA. The latter's role in tackling COVID-19 is limited by the violence in the territory. The thorough performance of the ACS in confronting this pandemic is dependent on intersectoral policies. Thus, the creation of a policy to tackle COVID-19 with the participation of the ACS needs to consider intersectoral actions for curtailing and preventing violence in the territory, in addition to adequate training in the prevention and detection of COVID-19.
33605343 There is increasing evidence that the use of masks is an indispensable protective measure against COVID-19, given the high transmissibility of the new coronavirus through the respiratory system, including by asymptomatic individuals. The use of cloth masks in public places has been established as a protective measure to be adopted alongside social distancing and hand hygiene. This narrative review aims to systematize the scientific evidence that informs the widespread use of cloth masks as a preventive measure against COVID-19 and to describe the evolution of positions contrary to or in favor of its use outside the home, in view of the advance of the new coronavirus pandemic globally. The scientific articles, technical notes, governmental decrees and other documents analyzed indicate that widespread use of masks has the potential to reduce the spread of the new coronavirus. We recommend that the Brazilian government adopt strategies to increase the supply of reusable cloth masks to the public, especially to vulnerable populations and to support studies on the impact of this measure to control the pandemic in the country. Finally, it is imperative to ensure that use of masks does not exacerbate stigmatization of racial groups that already face prejudice.
33605344 This study sets out to identify the prevalence of anxiety among health professionals during the COVID-19 pandemic. It involves a systematic review and meta-analysis of studies published in any language in 2020. A search was conducted in the Embase, LILACS and PubMed databases using the keywords anxiety, COVID-19, health workers, and synonyms. The estimated overall prevalence of anxiety with a 95% confidence interval was calculated using the random effects model. Of the 861 records identified, 36 articles were included in the systematic review and 35 in the meta-analysis. The overall prevalence of anxiety was 35% (95%CI: 29-40). A higher risk of anxiety was identified among women compared to men (Odds Ratio: 1.64 [95%CI: 1.47-1.84]), and in nurses, in comparison with physicians (Odds Ratio: 1.19 [95%CI: 1.07-1.33]). Being on the front line of COVID-19, being infected with coronavirus and having chronic diseases were also factors associated with a higher risk of anxiety. A high prevalence of anxiety among health professionals was observed, with higher risk among women and nurses. There is a pressing need for measures aimed at prevention of anxiety and providing early and appropriate treatment for those suffering from moderate and severe anxiety.
33605345 The scope of this article is to interpret ethical values and principles of the yoga tradition and discuss them with a view to possible contributions to psychosocial care in Primary Health Care (PHC). A theoretical-hermeneutic study was conducted, in which concepts contained in the Yoga Sutras of Patañjali were interpreted from the standpoint of mental health. It was revealed that the values found in the texts can enrich the existing practices of yoga for PHC users (who suffer from afflictions inherent to life) by providing ideas and guidelines that promote a sense of liberation from suffering. Such values and ethical principles can be incorporated into the discussions in PHC and psychosocial care, such as the reduction of iatrogenic disorders and unnecessary medication (quaternary prevention). It can also contribute to the relativization of biomedical power, stimulation of empathy and participation of users in care, with their subjective repositioning, multiplying autonomous ways of managing suffering and building networks of psychosocial support. The conclusion drawn was that the values of the Yoga Sutras may be present in various domains of PHC, which might provide a broader understanding of what 'the practice of yoga' means.
33605346 The relationship between hydrometeorological disasters and the health of affected populations is still hardly discussed in Rio Grande do Sul (RS), Brazil. Hepatitis A is a disease that involves health and urban environment issue and is an avoidable disease. This study aims to analyze the relationship between flood areas and waterborne diseases, in this case, Hepatitis A. A database of confirmed cases of Hepatitis A and flood events in the municipality of Encantado-RS, Brazil between 2012 and 2014 was structured. These data were analyzed spatially from the kernel estimator of the occurrence points of Hepatitis A cases and correlated to the urban perimeter. It was verified that 44 cases were registered in the three months following the occurrence of flood, an increase of almost 300% in the records of Hepatitis A. The results identified that all the confirmed cases are in the urban area located in the floodplain. This reaffirms the importance of encouraging the formulation and implementation of policies to prevent outbreaks of waterborne diseases post hydrometeorological disaster.
33605347 The co-occurrence of risk factors can lead to chronic noncommunicable diseases and even loss of life. The objectives of this study were to describe the prevalence and analyze sociodemographic characteristics linked to university life associated with the co-occurrence of risk factors among undergraduates. The study consisted of three cross-sectional surveys in 2010, 2012 and 2014 of undergraduates in Bahia, Brazil. The outcome of this study was the co-occurrence of two or more risk factors (lower levels of leisure-time physical activities, overweight/obesity, irregular consumption of fruits/vegetables and self-assessed lack of stress). The association among the variables was conducted by establishing the Prevalence Ratios. A total of 878, 879 and 877 undergraduates participated in the study in the years 2010, 2012 and 2014, respectively. In all three surveys, the prevalence of two or more risk factors was greater than 70%. The co-occurrence of two or more risk factors was associated with women, mature students, undergraduates from the health area and students with more years at university. The conclusion drawn was that the prevalence of two or more risk factors was high and that women were the group that presented higher prevalence of co-occurrence of risk factors in all surveys.
33605348 The scope of this study was to estimate the prevalence of spinal disorders among the elderly and analyze potential associated factors. It involved a cross-sectional study of a sample of 1,593 elderly individuals aged 60 years or more residing in the urban area of Bagé, State of Rio Grande do Sul. In addition to the 'spinal disorders' outcome, demographic, socioeconomic and behavioral variables, health perception, functional activities and the use of health services were investigated. Data collection was conducted by means of face-to-face interviews. Poisson regression analysis with robust variance was used to verify the factors associated with the outcome analyzed. Of the 1,593 participants, 37.4% reported spinal disorders. The factors related to the outcome were: low level of schooling, poor self-assessment of health, consultation in the last three months and the presence of hypertension, rheumatism and fractures. Interventions for musculoskeletal health can contribute to reduce the damages caused by spinal disorders among the elderly, such as loss of functional capacity, increased demands for health care and reduced quality of life.
33605349 We evaluated the feasibility of the menu adequacy regarding the nutritional constraints established by the National School Feeding Program (PNAE) and its relation to the cost. Each menu accounted for a given food combination within each food group. A diet optimization model comprising each set of foods was designed to obtain food quantities in order to meet the exigences of the PNAE at the lowest cost (menus with 20% and 30% of dietary reference intake for energy, macronutrients, calcium, iron, magnesium, zinc, vitamins A and C, also restrictions for sodium, saturated and trans fats, and added sugar). There was no feasible solution that accommodated all nutrient targets. Limiting components were calcium, sodium, and carbohydrates; but the menus were adequate for the other nutrients. There was a positive correlation between the menu cost and the frequency of meat and fruits, and a negative correlation with the contents of sodium and carbohydrates, and with the frequencies of rice and beans. The probability of obtaining carbohydrate adequacy was close to zero when the meat frequency was higher than one serving per week. In conclusion, it is unlikely to obtain menus that meet all the requirements of the PNAE.
33605350 The scope of this study was to analyze the relationship between quality of life, fatigue and injuries among professional Brazilian ballroom dancers. A total of 320 professionals from the five regions of Brazil participated, and the data were collected through a self-administered online questionnaire concerning general information, WHOQOL-bref, Yoshitake Fatigue Questionnaire and Injury Identification in Dancers Questionnaire. For data analysis, descriptive statistics were used, followed by inferential analysis and the Multiple Linear Regression test. The results show that greater fatigue is associated with a negative quality of life, revealing that, for each additional increment in total fatigue, the quality of life is expected to decrease by 0.218 points in the physical domain; 0.226 points in the psychological domain; 0.420 points in the social domain; and 0.304 points in the environmental domain. In contrast, the incidence and intensity of injuries were not associated with quality of life. The conclusion drawn is that the context of professional ballroom dance can influence both the presence of fatigue and the quality of life. It is suggested that health professionals working with these dancers perform multifactorial interventions in order to reduce fatigue, attenuating its effects on quality of life.
33605374 To analyze agreement/discrepancy between body self-image and Body Mass Index (BMI), according to variables related to type of food and environment influence. This was a cross-sectional analysis of 195 prepubescent children (≥5 years), attending a Primary Health Care service in Manguinhos, Rio de Janeiro. Z-scores were applied to classify BMI. Self-image was collected using the figure rating scale (silhouettes) validated for children. A multinomial model was used to estimate covariate association with the underestimated/overestimated BMI outcome in relation to self-image. Overweight children underestimated their BMI, as compared with self-image, more often (58.6%) than obese children (22.0%) and children with adequate BMI (49.0%). This dissociation was correlated to participation in a cash transfer program (OR=2.01 - 95%CI 1.04;3.90) and daily consumption of sugar-sweetened foodstuffs (OR=3.88 - 95%CI 1.05;14.39). Underestimation of BMI among overweight children should be taken into account by Primary Health Care services, in order to enhance intervention practices.
33605375 To analyze the prevalence of medication use, sources of access, and associated factors among rural residents in Pelotas, RS, Brazil. This was a cross-sectional study conducted in 2016 with adults ≥18 years old. Participants reported on medication use and sources of access to medication in the month prior to the interview. Poisson regression was used. Among the 1,519 respondents, 54.7% (95%CI 48.7;60.5) used some form of medication and 3.3% (95%CI 2.4;4.5) stopped taking necessary medication. Higher prevalence of use occurred in: women (PR=1.23 - 95%CI 1.12;1.34), the elderly (PR=2.36 - 95%CI 2.05;2.73), people with poorer self-perceived health (PR=1.29 - 95%CI 1.14;1.46) and people with a higher number of diseases (PR=2.37 - 95%CI 2.03;2.77). A total of 14.0% (95%CI 11.2;17.4) obtained medication exclusively from the Brazilian National Health System, prevalence of which was higher among those who self-reported themselves to be non-white and from lower economic classification. A low number stopped taking medication they needed to take. Use of free-of-charge medication was greater in groups with lower income.
33605395 To evaluate the predictive power of different malaria case time-series models in the state of Amapá, Brazil, for the period 1997-2016. This is an ecological time series study with malaria cases recorded in the state of Amapá. Ten deterministic or stochastic statistical models were used for simulation and testing in 3, 6, and 12 month forecast horizons. The initial test showed that the series is stationary. Deterministic models performed better than stochastic models. The ARIMA model showed absolute errors of less than 2% on the logarithmic scale and relative errors 3.4-5.8 times less than the null model. It was possible to predict future malaria cases 6 and 12 months in advance. The ARIMA model is recommended for predicting future scenarios and for earlier planning in state health services in the Amazon Region.
33605396 To analyze the temporal trend of overweight and obesity prevalence rates among adults in the Brazilian state capitals and Federal District between 2006 and 2019. This was a time series study using data from the Surveillance System for Risk and Protective Factors for Chronic Diseases by Telephone Survey, 2006-2019 (n=730,309). Prevalence of overweight and obesity for each of the years was analyzed, according to combined sex, age, and schooling. Temporal variation trend was analyzed using Prais-Winsten regression. Variations in overweight prevalence were observed, mainly among males 18-24 years old with up to 8 years of schooling (3.17%/year) and among women between 18-24 years old with more than 12 or more years of schooling (6.81% /year). Variations in obesity prevalence were found mainly among women 18-24 years old with more than 12 years of schooling (10.79%/year). There was an increase in overweight and obesity in most of the socio-demographic strata studied, especially among more educated young people.
33608892 To explore and describe the experiences and perspectives of various stakeholders regarding the use of powered wheelchair standing devices (PWSDs). The purposive sample included: children aged 6 to 18 years who used a PWSD (n=8; diagnoses: cerebral palsy, spinal muscular atrophy, spina bifida, spinal cord injury), parents of children 18 years of age or younger who used a PWSD (n=12), rehabilitation professionals working with children who used a PWSD (n=12), and professionals working at companies manufacturing PWSDs (n=3). Data were gathered via face-to-face interviews conducted either in person or via Zoom<sup>®</sup> and analyzed using the constant comparative method. Three main themes emerged in the data: (1) 'Stand-on-demand' revealed how participants perceived PWSDs as allowing children to stand whenever and wherever they wanted, thereby increasing participation; (2) 'It's more than weight-bearing' uncovered participants' perceptions of psychological and physical benefits from PWSD use; and (3) 'Ecosystems influencing PWSD acquisition and use' revealed child- and non-child-related factors perceived as influencing children's procurement and use of a PWSD. Use of a PWSD was perceived as providing a unique opportunity for children to stand whenever and wherever they desired. Findings suggest the possible transdiagnostic application of PWSDs. What this paper adds The ability to stand when desired was unique to powered wheelchair standing device (PWSD) use. Participants perceived numerous psychological and physical benefits from PWSD use. Child- and non-child-related factors influenced procurement and use of a PWSD.
33618794 The aim of this study is to explore the validation of the Resilience Scale in its long and brief versions (25 items and 14 items). This instrument assesses the individual's ability to withstand stressors, thrive and make sense of vital challenges. The sample included 511 Portuguese physicians. Both versions were validated through the study of internal structure validity, reliability, and convergent validity. The validity of the internal structure was analysed using the principal component analysis technique. Reliability was verified by the internal consistency study. For convergent validity, the correlation coefficients between these versions of the Resilience Scale and other scales validated to measure depression, anxiety, stress, and life satisfaction were calculated. Both versions of Resilience Scale showed good internal consistency. For each of the versions, one factor was retained in the principal component analysis. Convergent validity was verified by significant positive correlations between Resilience Scale (25 and 14) and a life satisfaction scale and significant negative correlations between Resilience Scale and depression, anxiety, and stress subscales. The results show the one-dimensional character of both versions of the Resilience Scale and support their usefulness and validity in the physician's class. This is the first validation study of this scale in a group of physicians. Its results are very satisfactory, and its use in this specific group is recommended.
33618795 Pregnancy is a rare condition in women with chronic kidney disease on hemodialysis, but its incidence has increased in recent years. Despite being a high-risk condition for both mother and fetus, there has been an improvement in care due to the increased number of cases described and the experience gained in dialysis therapy. We report the case of a multiparous 32-years-old women with chronic hypertension and chronic kidney disease with 10 years of evolution and difficult control, with a diagnosis of dichorionic/diamniotic twin pregnancy, 4 months after beginning hemodialysis. Pregnancy was managed by a multidisciplinary team, hemodialysis sessions were clinically and hemodynamically well tolerated, with good blood pressure and analytical control, as well as adequate development of both fetuses. She went into labor at 34 weeks and 6 days, so a caesarean section was performed, with 2 boys born with adequate weight for gestational age.
33618797 On page 13, in Table 1, first line on the third column (under 'Amplitude'), where it reads: '[0,21; 1].', It should read: '[21; 100]'. Article published with errors: https://www.actamedicaportuguesa.com/revista/index.php/amp/article/view/14516.
33618798 On page 23, Figure 1, where it reads: 'Controls 157 2015-2016 season = 47' (area circled in the image bellow) It should read: (see new Figure 1 on pag. 62). On page 25, Table 2, third line of the last column, under 'p-value', where it reads: 1 (see Table 2 in page 63) It should read: 1.000 (see new Table 2, page 64) Article published with errors: https://www.actamedicaportuguesa.com/revista/index.php/amp/article/view/13438.
33620162 To evaluate the content and psychometric properties of comprehensive nursing assessment tools developed based on The Eleven Functional Health Patterns Assessment Framework. An integrative literature review following Whittemore and Knafl's method and the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses. Searches on PubMed, Cinahl, and Virtual Health Library were conducted between September and December 2018. Six out of 146 records were included for review. Four articles were methodological studies and two were descriptive reports of the development of the tools. Tools were heterogenous in terms of their purpose, development, characteristics, and testing. Only one study provided data about construct validity. However, there were commonalities regarding the data that should be assessed in each tool. Few comprehensive nursing assessment tools using The Eleven Functional Health Patterns Assessment Framework are available. Purpose, process of development, characteristics, and testing varied among the tools, and most lack robust psychometric testing. This review provided a synthesis of the literature regarding the use of a discipline-specific framework to guide comprehensive nursing assessment. The differences across the tools and the lack of psychometric testing compromise the visibility of nursing and make it difficult to emphasize the contribution of nursing knowledge to patient care.
33624693 The study aimed to estimate the total contraceptive discontinuity rates in the use of oral and injectable hormonal contraceptives, and male condoms and dropout rates due to switches to more effective and less effective methods. Data on 2,051 women, users of primary healthcare services in three Brazilian state capitals, were collected using the contraceptive calendar. The results showed that 24.5% of users of oral hormonal contraceptives, 33.5% of users of injectables, and 39% of users of male condoms had discontinued the respective method after 12 months of use, independently of the reason, and that the rates varied little between the capitals but did depend on the method. The main reason for discontinuing use of the contraceptive method was the desire to become pregnant (20.8%). Conception while using the method was reported by 20% of the women, a proportion that reached 25.7% in users of male condoms. After 12 months with the method, the dropout rate for reasons related to the contraceptive method was 11.4% in users of injectables; 15.9% of users of male condoms switched to a more effective method; and 16.3% of users of injectables switched to a less effective method. Contraceptive discontinuity rates were high and varied according to the contraceptive method.
33624694 This study aimed to understand the meanings, risk perceptions, and strategies to prevent infection with the Zika virus developed by pregnant women with different socioeconomic conditions seen at public and private health services in the city of Salvador, Bahia State, Brazil, as well the contribution by their male partners in dealing with the risk of infection since the emergence of this virus in Brazil. A qualitative study was performed with 18 semi-structured interviews, nine each with pregnant women seen in the public and private health systems, respectively. The resulting data revealed insufficient knowledge in pregnant women concerning important aspects of Zika virus infection. The pregnant women's socioenvironmental situation was an important factor for risk perception and preventive strategies. Women interviewed in the public health system felt more vulnerable to the risk of infection than women interviewed in the private health system, with a major impact on their psychosocial well-being. According to the women, their partners placed huge demands on them to adopt preventive measures, but the male partners themselves failed to take the same precautions, e.g., ignoring the risk of sexual transmission of the Zika virus. In conclusion, three years since the outbreak reached Brazil, the Zika virus still has a major impact on the lives of pregnant women. It is crucial to strengthen health communications activities to guarantee the availability of information on the disease that responds adequately to the population's needs.
33624695 This study aimed to analyze the temporal effects (age, period, and cohort) on female homicide mortality in the states of Northeast Brazil from 1980 to 2017. This ecological time trend study used APC with a Bayesian approach and the deterministic method Integrated Nested Laplace Approximations (INLA) in the parameters' inference. The female homicide rates for each state of the Northeast were standardized by the direct method after correction of the death records for quality of information and underreporting. Data were also obtained on race/color, place of death, and means of perpetration. During the period analyzed, after correcting the death records, the Northeast region showed a mean rate of 5.40 female homicide deaths per 100,000 women, with a significant increase in all the states in the 2000s. In all the states, there was an increase in relative risk (RR) of homicide death in the second and third decades of life and a protective effect in older women. Except for the state of Sergipe, there was an increase in the risk of death in all five-year periods in the 2000s. The Northeast region as a whole and the states of Paraíba, Pernambuco, and Piauí showed a protective effect for women from older generations. There were also higher proportions of deaths in black women, homicides committed at home, and those perpetrated with firearms. The current study's findings may correlate with the spread of violence in Brazil in the 2000s and the Brazilian State's failure to protect women from violence.
33624697 The study aims to understand the influence of communicational relations among healthcare professionals in the coordination of care between levels. This is a qualitative study with data from the international multicenter study Equity-LA II, with dialectic hermeneutics as the theoretical reference. The authors listened to the audios from 15 interviews with professionals (7 physicians from primary care and 5 from specialized care, and 3 institutional supporters from primary care) in a municipal network in the Agreste region of the state of Pernambuco, Brazil, in 2016. The mixed categories were submitted to content analysis. The analysis revealed a lack of recognition, by nearly all of the professionals, of primary care as the organizational backbone for care, and the perception of coordination revealed obstacles related to disconnects in establishing dialogical relations. Knowledge of the physician's role in primary care is incomplete, and its praxis is viewed with distrust by specialists, while the reciprocal is not true. There was a visibly non-dialogical interpersonal relationship, based on asymmetric relations reflected in the specialist's authoritarian stance and that of inferiority of primary care physicians. The basis for the communicative action relates to pretensions of validity rather than of power, which is external to language, and impedes the discussion of reasons and arguments. There was little disposition for dialogue and reciprocal recognition between the parties involved, with interdiction of a communicative situation in which there is symmetry of participation. The results revealed communicational weaknesses, thus requiring strategies that allow achieving communicative understanding among the professionals and promoting satisfactory patient follow-up between levels of care.
33624736 This article describes harassment practices in higher education and explains why they are taken for granted, besides documenting forms of resistance reported by some students and professors. From January 2016 to March 2017, nine in-depth interviews were held with students who had experienced harassment at a public school of law in Mexico City, Mexico, besides interviews with three male students and two female professors. The findings suggest that some professors harass selectively, based on dress codes associated with gender stereotypes. Harassment can be viewed as an exemplary punishment with corrective purposes, or part of school discipline and the formation of female students' identity at the institution. The study also detected forms of heteronormative vigilance that take harassment for granted, to the degree that some female students consider it part of a lifestyle to which they have to adapt in order to complete their studies. Other female students have found ways of denouncing harassment, through informal strategies by which they have contributed to exposing and denaturalizing this gender violence. For example, some professors have ordered female students to wear skirts when taking exams, but this order is not always obeyed, and the students that have refused have organized resistance movements. Thus far there has been no intervention by the university administration to guarantee harassment-free spaces for women, which highlights the need to create guidelines and rules for higher education that allow typifying such acts as serious offenses and preventing sexual harassment.
33624737 In Brazil, since 2001, pesticides in food products have been monitored by the Program for Analysis of Pesticide Residues in Food Products (PARA, in Portuguese). The study aimed to analyze the challenges and strides in the control of pesticide residues in food products in Brazil based on the program's results from 2001 to 2015. A descriptive-analytical document review was conducted that used data from reports by the PARA, available at the website of the Brazilian Health Regulatory Agency. The program's main challenges feature the wide variation in the number of samples and active ingredients analyzed, as well as the reports' format. There is a need for more in-depth discussions of the criteria used for classification and authorization of active ingredients in Brazil, as well as the information's transparency to society. A total of 25 types of foods were analyzed, with more than 30,000 samples, since the PARA has been in force, but the maximum number of active ingredients analyzed was 228. The presence of active ingredients unauthorized for crops and unauthorized in the country was the principal cause of irregularities diagnosed in the foods. Although the program still faces various challenges, it helps spawn debate on the issue in society. Given the current government context of greater flexibility in the authorization of active ingredients in Brazil, it is necessary to strengthen the PARA.
33624738 The study aimed to estimate the prevalence of sexually transmissible infections (STIs) and associated factors in women in quilombola (maroon) communities in Brazil. This was a population-based cross-sectional study of quilombola women from March 2017 to January 2019. A questionnaire was used with sociodemographic, behavioral, and clinical information. A gynecological examination was performed for the collection of uterine cervical cells for oncotic cytology and the detection of Chlamydia trachomatis, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Trichomonas vaginalis, and human papillomavirus (HPV) via polymerase chain reaction. Rapid tests for HIV and syphilis were performed. The main outcome was defined as infection with one or more sexually transmissible pathogens. The analysis used chi-square test and hierarchical logistic regression. From a total of 380 women, 352 (92.6%) were included in the study. Prevalence of at least one STI was 18.5% (95%CI: 14.76-22.85). The highest prevalence was for HPV, with 11.1%, followed by 6.3% for T. vaginalis and 4.3% for C. trachomatis. There were no cases of N. gonorrhoeae. Prevalence was 0.3% for HIV and 4.3% for syphilis. Cervical-vaginal cytology was altered in 7.7% of the women. Detection of one or more STIs was significantly associated with age 25 to 44 years (OR = 2.33; 95%CI: 1.05-5.18), alcohol consumption (OR = 1.96; 95%CI: 1.06-3.64), altered cervical cytology (OR = 3.96; 95%CI: 1.65-9.48), and bacterial vaginosis (OR = 3.61; 95%CI: 2.01-6.47). Quilombola women showed high prevalence of one or more STIs, emphasizing the importance of organizing prevention strategies targeted to these women.
33725475 Primary open-angle glaucoma is the most frequent subtype of glaucoma. Relatives of primary open-angle glaucoma patients have an increased risk of developing the disease, suggesting a genetic predisposition to the disease. MYOC was the first primary open-angle glaucoma-causing gene identified. This study aimed to identify sequence variations in the MYOC gene that may be responsible for the phenotype in a group of primary open-angle glaucoma patients from the Centre Region of Portugal. The three coding exons and the proximal splicing junctions of the MYOC gene were studied using a PCR sequencing approach in a group of 99 primary open-angle glaucoma patients. The sequencing analysis enabled the identification of 20 variants, including four in the promoter region, seven in the introns and nine in exons one and three, of which four were missense variants. Initially, all four missense sequence variations identified were considered candidates to glaucoma causing disease mutations. However, after literature review, only variant c.1334C>T (Ala445Val) remained as likely responsible for mild late-onset normal tension glaucoma. This is the first study performed in a group of primary open-angle glaucoma patients from the Centre Region of Portugal, contributing to the identification of one genetic variant in the MYOC gene and reinforcing the hypothesis that normal tension glaucoma could be also due to MYOC gene mutations.
33725476 Human parechovirus type 3 has been recognized as a cause of pediatric infection, occasionally associated with serious illness, including sepsis and meningitis, particularly among young infants. The aim of this study is to report the first known human parechovirus type 3 outbreak in Portugal. Descriptive study of an outbreak that occurred between the 8th June to the 12th August 2016. Laboratory diagnosis was made by reverse transcription - polymerase chain reaction in the cerebrospinal fluid and/or in stools. Genotyping was made by reverse transcription - polymerase chain reaction and sequencing in stool samples from infants and family members. Human parechovirus type 3 infection was detected in seven infants, of which six were male. Median age was 23 days (5 - 52). One had seizures, with a magnetic resonance imaging scan showing white matter diffusion restriction. The mean duration of admission was 5.6 days (3 - 11), with favourable outcome in all. In three cases there were symptomatic close family members. Human parechovirus type 3 was identified in the stools of three mothers. Even though human parechovirus type 3 infection has been well described in the presented age group, most Portuguese hospitals do not have this laboratory diagnosis. Our results are comparable to those obtained in other countries. Besides detection of the virus in the cerebrospinal fluid, there were no raised local or systemic inflammatory markers. This study reports the first known outbreak, in infants, of human parechovirus type 3 in Portugal. Although there is no specific treatment, this diagnosis can avoid unnecessary empirical antibiotic treatment and prolonged admissions.
33727907 To characterize the design of excise taxes on sugar-sweetened beverages (SSBs) in Latin America and the Caribbean and assess opportunities to increase their impact on SSB consumption and health. A comprehensive search and review of the legislation in effect as of March 2019, collected through existing Pan American Health Organization and World Health Organization monitoring tools, secondary sources, and surveying ministries of finance. The analysis focused on the type of products taxed, and the structure and base of these excise taxes. Out of the 33 countries analyzed, 21 apply excise taxes on SSBs. Seven countries also apply excise taxes on bottled water and at least four include sugar-sweetened milk drinks. Ten of these excise taxes are ad valorem with some tax bases set early in the value chain, seven are amount-specific, and four have either a combined or mixed structure. Three countries apply excise taxes based on sugar concentration. While the number of countries applying excise taxes on SSBs is promising, there is great heterogeneity in design in terms of structure, tax base, and products taxed. Existing excise taxes could be further leveraged to improve their impact on SSB consumption and health by including all categories of SSBs, excluding bottled water, and relying more on amount-specific taxes regularly adjusted for inflation and possibly based on sugar concentration. All countries would benefit from additional guidance. Future research should aim to address this gap.
33727908 To identify factors associated with chronic kidney disease of non-traditional causes among children in Guatemala. A cross-sectional survey was conducted. The study population was all pediatric patients with stage 5 chronic kidney disease active in FUNDANIER's pediatric nephrology unit (<i>N</i> = 156). Simple random sampling led to a total of 100 participants. Data collection consisted of a questionnaire addressing individual and household characteristics, access and utilization of health care, and place of residence when the disease began. Chronic kidney disease etiology was obtained from medical records. Municipality-level secondary data were collected. Descriptive statistics were estimated. Logistic regression was used for bivariate and multivariate analysis. The odds ratio (OR) for almost all variables approached 1. Notable exceptions in household characteristics were mother's education level up to primary school (OR 2.2727) and living in an urban setting when symptoms began (OR 0.4035). Exceptions in municipal characteristics are zones with intensive small-scale agriculture (OR 3.8923) and those with intensive large-scale agriculture (OR 0.3338). <i>P</i>-values and confidence intervals show that the sample was not big enough to capture statistically significant associations between variables. Study findings suggest that factors associated with chronic kidney disease of non-traditional causes among children in Guatemala are intensive agricultural practices in their municipality of residence, and mother's level of education. Future research in children could use case-control designs or population-based studies in agricultural communities. Public health interventions that involve kidney function screening among children are recommended.
33727910 This article describes the main models for embedding research and the successful experiences and challenges faced in joint work by researchers and decisionmakers who participated in the Embedding Research for the Sustainable Development Goals (ER-SDG) initiative, and the experience of the Technical Support Center. In June 2018, funding was granted to 13 pre-selected research projects from 11 middle- and low-income countries in Latin America and the Caribbean (Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Paraguay, and Peru). The projects focused on the system-, policy-, or program-level changes required to improve health and build on the joint work of researchers and decisionmakers, with a view to bringing together evidence production and decision-making in health systems and services. The Technical Support Center supported and guided the production of quality results useful for decision-making. This experience confirmed the value of initiatives such as ER-SDG in consolidating bridges between research on the implementation of health policies, programs, and systems, and the officials responsible for operating health-related programs, services, and interventions. It highlighted the importance of both respecting and taking advantage of each context-and the specific arrangements and patterns in the relationships between researchers and decisionmakers-through incentives for embedded research.
33728715 Interleukin (IL)-2 stimulates antitumour immunity and is successfully used for the treatment of different neoplasias. Canarypox virus locally expressing feline IL-2 is safe and can be used to treat equine sarcoids. Twenty horses of different breeds with a median age of eight years (interquartile range 6.0-13.3 years) and a total number of 59 sarcoids were included in the study. In this prospective clinical trial, sarcoids were injected twice seven days apart, with a recombinant canarypox virus expressing feline IL-2. Complete blood counts (CBC) and fibrinogen levels were measured before treatment and on days 1, 2, 7 and 8. Complete regression was achieved in eight horses (40%) and partial regression in two horses (10%). No change in sarcoid size was observed in two horses (10%) and the disease progressed in five horses (25%). Sarcoids of three horses (15%) showed initial response followed by tumour growth. There were no significant changes in CBC and fibrinogen levels after either injection. One horse developed a mild fever the day after each injection, which subsided without treatment the following day. Treatment of equine sarcoids with recombinant canarypox virus expressing feline IL-2 seems to be a safe therapy option. Although the expression of IL-2 after vector injection and its biological activity in horses were not proven in this study, the treatment resulted in regression and partial regression in 50% of the cases. Further studies are necessary to verify these findings and to establish a treatment protocol.
33729281 The policy for Productive Development Partnerships emerged in Brazil as a Federal Government strategy to strengthen the Health Economic-Industrial Complex. Although the first partnership dates back to 2009, the regulatory framework was only consolidated in 2014, when eight policy objectives were described. Of these, this article is intended to specifically evaluate the fourth objective: 'to protect the interests of the Public Administration and society by seeking economic savings and advantage, considering prices, quality, technology, and social benefits'. An assessment of the policy results was performed through a mixed methodological approach, by proposing four assessment indicators. The quantative analysis results confirmed a reduction in the purchase price for 37 of the 39 drugs assessed after the policy implementation, while there was an increase in the amounts purchased in 38 of the 39 drugs. On the other hand, the qualitative analysis revealed a lack of planning by public administrators and lack of compliance with the policy guidelines related to the principle of advantageousness. Approximately 40% of the drugs studied did not undergo a health technology assessment by the Brazilian National Commission for the Incorporation of Technologies in the Unified Health System, raising doubts with regards to the advantage for the Public Administration, which is measured by the cost-effectiveness of the drugs incorporated by the policy.
33729282 The study aimed to describe the characteristics of SARS-CoV-2 transmission among members of households with a confirmed primary case of COVID-19 in districts with low burden of cases in Lima, Peru, compared to a district with high burden. This was a retrospective study with a secondary database review. Information was collected from an epidemiological surveillance activity in close contacts (household members) in 52 households in Lima, with a single member with COVID-19. Reevaluation was conducted in 10 households. The study evaluated epidemiological and clinical variables and their association with the result of the rapid serological test (presence of IgG, IgM, or both). Secondary cases were found in 40 households, representing mean identification of 49.9% per household. Secondary attack rate in household members was 53% (125 cases), and symptomatic individuals accounted for 77.6% of cases (symptomatic/asymptomatic ratio: 3.5). Presence of fever and/or chills was found in 40% of persons with positive test results, followed by sore throat with 39.2%. Ageusia and anosmia were present in 22.4% and 20.8% of cases, respectively. When there was a primary case of COVID-19 in the household, the secondary attack rate was 53%; however, in an important proportion of households there were no positive cases other than the primary case. The epidemiological and clinical findings were consistent with reports from other international series.
33729283 The coronavirus pandemic that struck the world in late 2019 continues to break records of new cases and deaths from the disease. Guidelines for clinical management of infected patients and prevention of new cases focus on measures to control symptoms, hygiene habits, social distancing, and decrease in human crowding. This forced a change in the way health services provide care, generating the incorporation of new health technologies. The Essay thus aims to compile and analyze experiences in the use of digital health technologies to minimize the impacts of COVID-19. The authors identified the development of technological solutions for clinical management of patients, imaging diagnosis, use of artificial intelligence for risk analysis, geolocation apps, data analysis and reports, self-diagnosis, and even orientation for decision-making. The great majority of the initiatives listed here prove effective in minimizing the impacts of COVID-19 on health systems and aim to decrease human crowding and thus facilitate access to services, besides contributing to the incorporation of new health practices and modes of care.
33729301 This study analyzed the role of ultra-processed foods (UPFs) in the food and nutritional profile of pregnant women's diet. This was a cross-sectional study conducted in a representative sample of pregnant women attending primary healthcare units in Maceió, capital of the State of Alagoas, Brazil. Food consumption was assessed with the application of two 24-hour food recalls on nonconsecutive days, and the consumption items were grouped according to the NOVA classification. Overall estimates were expressed as absolute dietary consumption (mean calorie intake) and relative consumption (percentage of total energy intake according to food groups and consumption items). Analysis of variance was used to compare mean energy and nutrient intake according to food groups. The association between quintiles of the energy share from UPFs (exposure variable) and (1) consumption items and food groups, (2) percentage of total energy from macronutrients, and (3) micronutrient density was analyzed via adjusted linear regression models. Mean energy intake in pregnant women was 1,966.9Kcal/day, 22% of which from UPFs. A direct relationship was observed between the percentage of energy from UPFs and total energy consumption (β = 228.78Kcal; SE = 21.26). In addition, an increase in the share of UPFs was associated with a statistically significant reduction in the intake of protein, fiber, magnesium, iron, potassium, zinc, selenium, folate, and vitamins D and E, as well as in the consumption of traditional foods such as protein, beans, roots, and tubers. Our data thus indicate that the consumption of UPFs reduces the overall nutritional and food quality of diet in pregnant women.
33729302 Mobbing, or bullying in the workplace, has gained relevance in recent decades due to its growing magnitude and negative effects on workers' health. There are various approaches for studying the issue. However, thus far the evidence is scarce in Latin America and is focused on specific samples. This study aims to analyze workplace bullying and its association with mental health in the wage-earning population and to determine the extent to which this association is modified by gender. A survey was conducted with a sample of 1,995 male and female salaried workers in Chile's three main metropolitan areas (Greater Santiago, Greater Valparaíso, and Greater Concepción) with three-stage random selection (blocks, households, and individuals). Prevalence rates for depressive symptoms, use of psychotropic medication, and stress were 10.9%, 12.8%, and 13%, respectively, and there was a strong relationship between mental health variables and workplace bullying, which persisted in the adjusted models. When comparing this association in the models stratified by gender, no significant differences were observed between men and women.
33729304 This study aimed to analyze the time trend in stillbirth rate (SBR) and the contribution by investigation to improving the definition of underlying cause of stillbirth in the city of São Paulo, Brazil, according to the place where the death certificate was issued. An ecological approach was used to analyze the trend in SBR by weight stratum (< 2,500g and ≥ 2,500g) and total deaths in the city in 2007-2017. Prais-Winsten generalized linear regression was used. The study of cases analyzed the underlying causes of stillbirth from 2012 to 2014, before and after the investigation, time of conclusion of the investigation, and redefinition of the underlying cause of stillbirths by type of issuer. In deaths with < 2,500g, there was an upward trend in SBR of 1.5% per year and a reduction (-1.3% per year) in stillbirths ≥ 2,500g. Total deaths presented a stable trend. In 2012-2014, 90% of deaths with ≥ 2,500g were investigated. After investigation, the underlying cause of death was redefined in 15% of the deaths, and not otherwise specified stillbirth (P95) represented 25% of the causes of death. The highest proportion of changes in the underlying cause of death occurred in deaths for which the death certificate was issued by the death certification review service (17%), while in health services the proportion was 10.6%. In conclusion, the SBR in deaths with ≥ 2,500g showed a downward trend. There was a significant redefinition of underlying causes, especially in those attested by the death certification review service. However, the redefinition was insufficient to expand the proportion of causes of death that would allow a better understanding of the mortality conditions.
33729305 Recent studies on COVID-19 have focused on the pandemic's effects on public health and the biosafety controls and their socioeconomic implications. The current mixed-methods study takes a new look at the topic, combining qualitative and quantitative strategies to identify the social representations of media reception in a sector of the Colombian population during social isolation in the COVID-19 pandemic. The results indicate that these representations vary and are associated with the media channel and the effect the reception produces on mood and mental health. A total of 80 interviews and 1,068 online survey forms were applied in different regions of Colombia. The qualitative phase showed that the programs or messages received were represented positively when they came from audiovisual entertainment and contributed to the family unit and reduced stress during the lockdown. Meanwhile, media reception was represented negatively when the messages or news came from journalism or social networks and increased the misinformation, anxiety, and fear of contagion. The quantitative phase found that media reception decreased as the lockdown continued, due to information saturation and the proliferation of news emphasizing the risks of COVID-19. The results reveal the need to focus health communication on the development of information skills that allow people to learn and assess the veracity and relevance of information received during the pandemic.
33729306 The article presents the results of a study on the experiences of adolescents that decided to terminate a pregnancy in the context of legal abortion services in Montevideo, Uruguay, from 2016 to 2018. The main objective was to examine the decision-making process and access to legal abortion from the perspective of the adolescent girls themselves. This involved analyzing circumstances, motives, and persons that influenced the decision and the ways this was handled in the health services. A cross-sectional, exploratory, and descriptive study was designed, based on a qualitative methodology. The main technique used for collecting the information was a semi-structured interview with 14 adolescents 17 to 19 years of age who had voluntarily terminated a pregnancy in public healthcare services. The motives for the abortion reveal the weight of socially accepted reasons, incorporated as their own. The interviews showed that the adolescent's mother plays an important role as the reference for the decision. The adolescents reported that they had made the decision to have the abortion before going to the health service. The results highlight the positive role of a legal framework that enables voluntary abortion services. The results help understand the experiences of adolescents facing a difficult life decision, the family's role, particularly that of the adolescent's mother, the legal framework's place in the decision, the weight of stigma and moral sanctions, and expectations towards care in health services.
33729307 The study aimed to estimate the prevalence of behavioral risk factors for cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) and factors associated with their accumulation in adolescents from the rural area of a municipality in Pelotas, Rio Grande do Sul State, Brazil. This was a cross-sectional school-based census-type study with a sample of 515 sixth to nineth-grade schoolchildren in 21 rural public schools in Pelotas. The target behavioral risk factors were: physical inactivity; irregular consumption of fruits, vegetables, and greens; initiation to alcohol consumption and smoking; and addition of salt to foods. The study outcome was the cluster score of behavioral risk factors, varying from 0 to 3: no behavioral risk factors for CVD or exposure to 1, 2, or ≥ 3 behavioral risk factors. Ordinal logistic regression was performed to assess the effect adjusted for individual characteristics on the accumulation of behavioral risk factors, using as the reference category individuals without any risk factor. Physical inactivity was the most prevalent risk factor (74.8%), followed by irregular consumption of fruits, vegetables, and greens (56.2%). Approximately 42% of the adolescents presented two behavioral risk factors, the most prevalent combination of which was physical inactivity and irregular consumption of fruits, vegetables, and greens (23%). The odds of accumulating two or more behavioral risk factors increased with age. The presence and simultaneity of behavioral risk factors is quite high among adolescents from the rural area of Pelotas, showing that they are exposed to the development of CVD. Interventions are needed to prevent the simultaneous occurrence of these risk factors.
33729309 Gluten-related disorders affect 1% to 6% of the population, with complications and high risk of short and long-term morbidity and mortality. Since 2009, Brazil has a Clinical Protocol of Therapeutic Guidelines for Celiac Disease, but there are frequent complaints by persons with gluten-related disorders concerning the lack of healthcare professionals' knowledge of this topic and the difficulties related to healthcare, for both diagnosis and treatment. This study aimed to understand the weaknesses in healthcare perceived by persons with gluten-related disorders. An online qualitative survey was conducted in the Living Without Gluten group on Facebook, consulting the records saved by the group for 65 months, which totaled 510 posts and the respective comments. The data were grouped in categories, and thematic content analysis was performed, adopting the theoretical references on healthcare. The analysis revealed that the searches for diagnosis and adequate treatment were often described as a forced pilgrimage, resulting from shortcomings in healthcare, including lack of up-to-date knowledge on gluten-related disorders among the healthcare professionals and problems in the physician-patient relationship. Weaknesses in patient care and late diagnoses contribute to increasing the risk of complications and deaths. In this context, the Living Without Gluten group plays a leading role as a support group and network of solidarity, favoring increased awareness and empowerment of numerous Brazilians with gluten-related disorders.
33729335 This paper addresses strategies employed in the implementation of the Rede Cegonha ('Stork Network') (RC), considering its contribution to change the delivery and birth care model in the Brazilian Unified Health System (SUS). It contextualizes RC as a project signed by SUS management interagency bodies and the importance of implementing the services' strategies. In this sense, it points out two essential axes supporting the RC, which are strategic to promote the intervention-analysis in obstetric-neonatal care, namely, institutional support (IS) and teamwork training. The IS enables the RC to become a collective construction assumed by teams in their action spaces and is pointed out as an innovative way of implementing health-related projects. The intervention-training methodology innovates training to intervene in work. These experiences are affirmed as potentiators of the RC in creating the conditions to change the technocratic rationale of management and care throughout labor and birth.
33729336 The Rede Cegonha strategy was launched in 2011 by the federal government to improve pregnancy, delivery, postpartum care, and child development in the first two years of life, reduce maternal and child mortality, and expand women's sexual and reproductive rights. We propose seven new maternal indicators to improve obstetric care evaluation in the next assessment cycle. The new indicators are the use of Robson's classification to monitor cesarean rates, use of magnesium sulfate in cases of preeclampsia/eclampsia, pregnant women's use of calcium supplements, blood transfusions and hysterectomy in delivery/puerperium, management of puerperal sepsis, IUD insertions in the postpartum/post-abortion period, and obstetricians' continuing education. These indicators are based on robust scientific evidence and can reduce unnecessary cesarean sections, prevent maternal deaths and future unplanned pregnancies.
33729337 This article describes the methodology used to evaluate delivery and childbirth care practices in maternity hospitals that belong to the Rede Cegonha, according to scientific evidence and rights guarantee. It shows the maternity selection criteria, the evaluated guidelines, their devices and check items, the method used to collect information and the treatment of data to obtain the results. It discusses the chosen guidelines and the strategy of returning results to managers and services and discusses their potential to foster management qualification processes and obstetric and neonatal care. This is a study of delivery and childbirth care practices of 606 maternity hospitals selected for the second evaluation cycle of the Rede Cegonha. The methodological paths stood out for the construction of tripartite co-responsibility for the process and the evaluation results, with an emphasis on its usefulness for the decision-makers and the hospital institutions involved.
33729338 Using a judgment framework, this article analyzes the degree of implementation of the best practices in labor and childbirth care contained in the guidelines of the Rede Cegonha (RC) across Brazil. The study eligibility criteria were public and mixed hospitals located in a health region with a RC action plan in place in 2015, resulting in a total of 606 facilities distributed across the country. Three different data collection methods were used: face-to-face interviews with managers, health professionals and puerperal women; document analysis; and on-site observation. The framework was built around the five guidelines of the Labor and Childbirth component of the RC. Degree of implantation was rated as follows: adequate; partially adequate and inadequate. The performance of maternity facilities was rated as partially adequate for all guidelines except for hospital environment, which was rated as inadequate. A huge variation in degree of implementation was observed across regions, with the South and Southeast being the best-performing regions in most items. The results reinforce the need for an ongoing evaluation of the actions developed by the RC to inform policy-making and the regulation of labor and childbirth care.
33729339 This article compares the findings of 'Avaliação da Rede Cegonha' (ARC - Stork Network Assessment), an evaluative study on the Rede Cegonha (RC - Stork Network) program, with Nascer no Brasil (NB - Born in Brazil), a national survey on labor and birth, conducted in 2011-12, before the start implementation of RC. ARC was conducted in 2017, in 606 maternity hospitals involved in RC and NB included a sample with national representation of 266 hospitals. In the current analysis, we included the 136 SUS hospitals that participated in both studies, totaling 3,790 and 12,227 puerperal women. We perform comparisons of best practices and interventions in the management of labor and delivery using Pearson's chi-square test for independent samples. The prevalence of best practices was, on average, 150% higher in ARC than in NB, with a greater relative increase in less developed regions, for older, brown and black women and less educated. Regarding interventions, there was an average reduction of 30% between NB and ARC, with a greater relative reduction in less developed regions and less educated women. There was a significant improvement in the scenario of care for labor and childbirth, with a reduction in regional, educational and racial inequalities in access to appropriate technologies, suggesting that the RC intervention was effective.
33729340 This study aimed to evaluate the racial inequality on childbirth care at the Rede Cegonha (Stork Network) using obstetric good practice and interventions indicators. Racial inequality, measured by the total effect of ethnicity/skin color in the crude model, was seen in many indicators. After adjusting for mediators, such as age, schooling, parity, high-risk hospital, and geographic macro-regions, the persistent direct effect suggests racial discrimination against black women with lower partograph completion (PR 0.88; 95% CI 0.80-0.95). Black women stayed less in lithotomy (PR 0.93; 95% CI 0.89-0.98), performed less episiotomy (PR 0.81; 95% CI 0.68 - 0.96), and had less episiotomy suturing pain (PR 0.66; 95% CI 0.51 - 0.87) when compared to white women, suggesting more good practice applied to black women. However, according to the interventionist care model still adopted by many professionals, these practices are routine, and lower achievement in black women would be better interpreted as evidence of racial discrimination against these women. For other outcomes, the ethnicity/skin color effect disappeared after adjusting for mediators, suggesting mitigation or disappearance of the skin color effect in some practices/interventions in childbirth.
33729341 Based on the Rede Cegonha guidelines that propose the strengthening of women's sexual and reproductive rights, we sought to present a brief overview of issues related to reproductive planning and to analyze obstetric practices in childbirth care for adolescents and women of advanced age in maternity hospitals linked to Rede Cegonha. Data were extracted from an assessment conducted in 2017, based on information from the interview with puerperal women and from the hospital record. For age extremes, the high proportion of unplanned pregnancies and low use of contraception means problems in accessing family planning programs. Adolescents are more exposed to the presence of a companion and less to the use of analgesia in labor. Advanced maternal age were more likely to use analgesia in labor and to give birth in the lithotomy position, being less exposed to amniotomy. Although Rede Cegonha is an excellent strategy for improving assistance to childbirth, attention is still needed to the use of potentially unnecessary or not recommended interventions, with greater incentive to good obstetric practices.
33729342 This paper aims to compare best practices for healthy newborns in public and mixed hospitals affiliated with SUS, according to type of birth, between 'Nascer no Brasil/2011' (NB - Birth in Brazil) and in the last assessment cycle of Rede Cegonha, here called 'Avaliação da Rede Cegonha/2017' (ARC - Stork Network Assessment). NB included a sample with national representativeness of 266 hospitals, and ARC was conducted in 606 maternity hospitals included in the Rede Cegonha strategy, totaling 15,994 and 8,047 pairs of healthy mothers and newborns, respectively.Between the two studies, NB-2011 and ARC-2017, although the proportion of cesarean sections remained around 44%, the prevalence of skin-to-skin contact with newborns, breastfeeding in the delivery room and breastfeeding in the first 24h of life increased by 140%, 82% and 6%, respectively. The proportion of upper airway aspiration of newborns dropped 65%. The results indicate that the use of evidence-based guidelines for the care of healthy newborns has increased in clinical practice, considering the six-year period between the compared studies. Despite the progress, important challenges remain to ensure best practices for all women and newborns, especially in relation to cesarean births.
33729343 This study aims to evaluate the birthplace of preterm infants with less than 34 gestational weeks at birth by type of neonatal care service in maternity hospitals of the 'Rede Cegonha' and estimate the maternal factors associated with the inadequate place of birth for gestational age. This national cross-sectional study was performed in 2016/2017 to evaluate health establishments with the Rede Cegonha's action plan. Information was analyzed from 303 puerperae and the respective health establishments of their births. Newborns were classified by gestational age at birth (<30 and 30-33 weeks) and health establishments as hospitals with neonatal intensive care service, hospitals with intermediate neonatal care service, and hospitals without neonatal care service. Ministerial Ordinance N° 930/2012 was used to classify the birthplace as appropriate for the newborn's gestational age. Preterm birth prevalence was 37.3 at less than 30 weeks' gestation and 66.8 at 30-33 weeks. Birth in inappropriate services for the newborn's gestational age occurred in 6.3%, with significant regional and social differences. Inequalities in access to neonatal care for preterm infants persist in the 'Rede Cegonha' despite advances.
33729344 This article analyzes the environment of birth places, considering the presence of PCP room (Prepartum, Childbirth, and Postpartum) in 575 hospitals that deliver in Sistema Único de Saúde (Unified Health System) within the scope of Rede Cegonha. The data were extracted from a survey called Avaliação da atenção ao parto e nascimento nas maternidades da Rede Cegonha (Assessment of childbirth and birth care in the Rede Cegonha maternity units), carried out in 2017 by UFMA and ENSP, in partnership with the Ministry of Health. The PCP room model combines care for parturient women in a single space, favoring the role of women and the exercise of good practices in childbirth and birth care. The information was obtained by direct observation in the services, and assessment considered the presence and adequacy of PCP rooms and their distribution according to the pre-childbirth environment, which were compared with specific characteristics of these hospitals. Collective rooms for childbirths prevail and only 16.8% of beds are PCP rooms. This picture suggests difficulties in resource management, resistance to changes and insufficiencies in institutional support, which have hampered the transition from the childbirth environment model in Brazilian hospitals. The Brazilian obstetric and neonatal field has lived a fertile period, but it is necessary to build and sustain political-institutional disposition to advance the changes.
33729345 There are no nationwide studies characterizing accessibility for people with disabilities during delivery. This study aimed to describe the physical structure of hospital units regarding accessibility for pregnant and puerperae with motor (MD), visual (VD), or hearing (HD) disabilities in Brazil. This is an ecological, descriptive study conducted in all 606 health facilities linked to the 'Rede Cegonha' where deliveries occurred, according to 2015 databases. We performed the descriptive and geospatial analysis and considered the presence of motor accessibility when the establishment had a handrail or elevator ramp, wheelchair-sized doors, and accessible bathroom with bars. We assumed visual accessibility when there was tactile signage on the floor (Braille system or embossed figures) and hearing accessibility when there was signage by texts, pictures, signs, posters, or symbols in the environments. In Brazil, only 26 (4.3%) of the facilities had accessibility for people with MD, 20 (3.3%) for people with VD, and none for HD. Motor accessibility was worse in the North and Northeast of Brazil, and hearing accessibility in the North region. Despite advances in the implementation of the 'Rede Cegonha' in Brazil, the facilities' structure is not adapted for women with MD, VD, or HD.
33729346 Neonatal units should be organized as a progressive care line, with intermediate and intensive care beds (conventional and kangaroo). The aim of this study was to evaluate the status and adequacy of neonatal beds in maternity hospitals linked to the 'Stork Network' ('Rede Cegonha'). A descriptive study was conducted in 606 maternity hospitals in all regions of Brazil. The databases used belonged to the Stork Network Evaluation Survey and the National Live Birth System. To assess the distribution of neonatal beds by typology, the parameters proposed in Ordinance N. 930/2012 of the Ministry of Health were used. Most neonatal units are not organized as a progressive care line with the three types of bed planned. Kangaroo intermediate care beds comprise the minority of implanted beds. There is a concentration of intensive and intermediate beds in the Southeast and South regions, which show a kangaroo intermediate care bed deficit. Analyzing the adequacy of beds by the number of live births, one can observe an inadequacy of Kangaroo care beds in all regions of Brazil, as well as intensive bed deficit in the North and Northeast regions, and adequacy of conventional intermediate care beds in all regions.
33729347 This study aimed to assess whether nurses' presence in delivery care in maternity hospitals linked to the Rede Cegonha program promotes access to best obstetric practices during labor and delivery. We conducted an evaluative study in 2017 in all 606 SUS maternity hospitals that joined this strategic policy in all Brazilian states. We collected data from maternity hospital managers and puerperae. The analysis was performed at two levels: hospital with or without a nurse in delivery care; and professionals that attended vaginal delivery, whether doctors or nurses. We used best practices and interventions for vaginal deliveries and cesarean section rates as dependent variables. We included 5.016 subjects for analyses of vaginal deliveries and 9.692 to calculate cesarean section rates. Multiple regressions were adjusted for geographic region, maternity hospital size, and puerperae skin color and parity. Maternity hospitals with nurses in delivery care used more the partograph and less oxytocin, lithotomy, episiotomy, and cesarean section. Deliveries attended by nurses had more frequent use of the partograph and a lower likelihood of lithotomy and episiotomy. The inclusion of nurses in vaginal delivery care has successfully brought women closer to a more physiological and respectful delivery.
33729348 This paper describes and analyzes the process of providing feedback on the results of the second evaluation cycle of good practices of delivery and birth care in maternity hospitals linked to the Rede Cegonha, a Ministry of Health strategy implemented in 2011 to improve obstetric and neonatal healthcare and management. This is a qualitative study based on the documentary analysis of 27 reports from the states and the Federal District referring to the feedback workshops with 1.641 participants, 40% of whom were professionals and managers of the maternity hospitals evaluated, 25% of state representatives, 20% of municipal health secretariats and 15% of federal representatives. Around 46% of maternity hospitals' action plans in 11 states were received from January to August 2019. The results show the challenge of incorporating the monitoring and evaluation processes in these maternity hospitals' daily lives due to structural issues in institutional culture. This situation interferes with the local systematic analysis of information and the implementation of national evaluation cycles with the swift and continuous feedback of the results since access to secondary national data is non-existent in good delivery care practices.
33729349 The article analyzes the opinions of a group of women regarding the standard of care at maternity facilities attached to the Ministry of Health's Programa Rede Cegonha or Stork Network Program. The women's views were obtained from a questionnaire administered to 10,665 puerperal women between 2016 and 2017 as part of the survey Evaluation of good labor and childbirth care practices in maternity facilities covered by the Rede Cegonha, conducted by the Oswaldo Cruz Foundation and Maranhão Federal University. Consisting mainly of closed-ended questions, the questionnaire contained an optional open-ended question at the end that allowed women to talk freely about the standard of care received in the maternity facility. Of the 10,665 puerperal women interviewed, 2,069 gave their opinions. We undertook a critical reading of the opinions identifying four core themes, which were discussed in the light of the relevant literature: puerperal woman/health team relationship; puerperal women's right to information; presence of a companion; and quality of hospital services and facilities. Giving both praise and criticism, all the women reiterated the importance of improving the quality of public health services to ensure the humanization of childbirth in Brazil.
33729350 This article eevaluates delivery and birth care practices in maternity facilities in Brazil's North and Northeast regions. We conducted a qualitative evaluation of 91 facilities in the North and 181 facilities in the Northeast. The data was collected using systematic observation by a team of 44 previously trained evaluators and recorded in a field diary. A thematic analysis of the collected data was performed, resulting in three core themes: challenges of collegial management; challenges for coping with obstetric violence; and the potential of the evaluation process for driving change. Advances were made in the implementation of good labor and childbirth care practices; however, some maternity facilities still reproduce hierarchical models without spaces for collegial management and accounts of obstetric violence were common. Health professionals used the presence of risk to justify the low level of adoption of good practices. However, the findings reveal progress towards the humanization of care. The results also show the potential of the evaluation process for driving change. Although progress has been made towards the adoption of the good practices recommended by the Stork Network Program both in the area of management and care delivery, many challenges remain in view of the dominance of a hierarchical management model associated with an interventionist approach to health care.
33729351 This paper aims to evaluate the performance of PHC from the perspective of users and its association with sociodemographic characteristics, self-reported health conditions, and behavioral risk factors for Chronic Noncommunicable Diseases. This is a population-based cross-sectional study with data from the 2015 VIGITEL Telephone Survey. The Primary Care Assessment Tool short version was adopted. The study population covers adults over 18 years of age who used PHC services in Belo Horizonte in the last 12 months (n = 872). The multiple logistic regression model was performed to estimate the odds ratio. We observed that adults without a health insurance plan are 3.21 (95% CI 2.08-4.96) more likely than those with a health insurance plan to evaluate PHC with a high score (≥ 6.6), and adults with low schooling (95% CI 1.48-5.32), people with diabetes (95% CI 1.05-3.24), obese (95% CI 1.20-3.24), and older adults (95% CI 1.00-1.41) were 2.81, 1.84, 1.97, and 1.19 more likely to report a high score for PHC quality than the others, respectively. The use of the PCATool short version in a telephone survey showed a new possibility for PHC performance assessment and can become useful in managing health services.
33729352 Intimate partner violence (IPV) is a social and public health concern. This article aims to identify factors associated with death in women with IPV notification. This is a case-control study based on the record-linkage of the Mortality Information System (SIM), from 2011 to September/2017, and the Notifiable Diseases Information System (SINAN), 2011 to 2016. The 'case' group consisted of women aged 15 to 59 years old with notification of violence on SINAN, whose author was current or former intimate partner and died by any cause registered on SIM. The 'control' group consisted of women 15-59 years old, living in the same municipality of the cases and victim of IPV registered on SINAN, but without a death record on SIM. Multiple logistic regression was used to estimate the odds ratio of death. 151,826 Brazilian women were victim of IPV and were notified by SINAN, and 2,538 died. The main cause of death was homicide. The following characteristics conferred a greater chance of death: having race/skin-color black or yellow; having disabilities; living in rural area; physical violence, torture and multiple types combined; violence perpetrated by a firearm, a sharp object and multiple means combined.
33729354 The American response to the pandemic involves a prominent volume of federal resources, especially for developing and acquiring products for internal use, such as diagnostics or vaccines. Investment mechanisms and historical aspects justify this expenditure. Thus, the social construction of nationalism in American society hinders access to health technologies. The review of such aspects shows how the United States (U.S.) secured a large number of potential products, ensuring excessive local production. This unilateral foreign policy has influenced other countries or regional blocs and undermined global cooperation and solidarity, affecting the collective health of several nations.
33729355 The article aims to discuss the care provided by female healthcare workers in Brazil during the Covid-19 pandemic, based on a sociological analysis by authors who discuss such care as devalued and poorly paid work performed to a large extent by low-income women. The work involves social constructions of emotions and has used the body as a work instrument in care for others. In addition, the increasingly precarious nature of health work in Brazilian society, aggravated in recent decades, with an increase in temporary contracts, loss of labor rights, overload of tasks, and adverse work conditions, among others, adds to the increase in medical and hospital care in the Covid-19 pandemic. In this context, female healthcare workers experience lack of personal protective equipment, fear of coronavirus infection, concerns with their children and other family members, and illness and death of coworkers and themselves. The article highlights the need for government attention and management of healthcare work and professional societies, analyzing the work conditions female healthcare workers are experiencing in confronting the pandemic.
33729356 Vulnerability is a crucial factor in addressing COVID-19 as it can aggravate the disease. Thus, it should be considered in COVID-19 control and health prevention and promotion. This ecological study aimed to analyze the spatial distribution of the incidence of COVID-19 cases in a Brazilian metropolis and its association with social vulnerability indicators. Spatial scan analysis was used to identify COVID-19 clusters. The variables for identifying the vulnerability were inserted in a Geographically Weighted Regression (GWR) model to identify their spatial relationship with COVID-19 cases. The incidence of COVID-19 in Fortaleza was 74.52/10,000 inhabitants, with 3,554 reported cases and at least one case registered in each neighborhood. The spatial GWR showed a negative relationship between the incidence of COVID-19 and demographic density (β=-0,0002) and a positive relationship between the incidence of COVID-19 and the percentage of self-employed >18 years (β=1.40), and maximum per capita household income of the poorest fifth (β=0.04). The influence of vulnerability indicators on incidence showed areas that can be the target of public policies to impact the incidence of COVID-19.
33729357 The scope of this article is to identify factors associated with personal autonomy among the elderly. It is a systematic review of analytical epidemiological studies selected from the PubMed, Web of Science, Scopus and Lilacs databases, without time and language constraints. The search located 3,435 articles and selection was conducted in two phases: reading of abstracts and entire articles, with inclusion and exclusion criteria, by two independent reviewers, resulting in seven selected studies. The risk of bias was assessed using the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale protocol. All studies included were of sectional design and analyzed autonomy from the perspective of the perception of increased autonomy. The instruments used were the Hertz Perceived Entity of Autonomy Scale and the Chinese version of Perceived Enactment of Autonomy Scale. The factors associated with the autonomy of the elderly identified were grouped by functionality, family relations, interpersonal relations, life perception, satisfaction with health services, demographic factors, schooling, general health status and quality of life. The study of personal autonomy among the elderly presented a multifactorial and biopsychosocial character, although it is a recent theme in which further research with more detailed scientific evidence is necessary.
33729359 The literature does not clearly define the assignments of Community Health Workers (CHW) in the field of oral health. This study aimed to redefine the main assignments of CHW regarding their work processes in oral health in basic health care. A theoretical-logical model based on an official publication from the Brazilian Ministry of Health, with six dimensions of work, was used. The model was built based on the assignments of CHW in Dentistry and sent to 30 experts chosen intentionally for the consensual study, using the Delphi technique. The matrix presented the following dimensions: registration of families, mapping the coverage area, home visits, work with community health education, participation in the community, and intersectoral work. These dimensions were detailed with sub-dimensions and measurable criteria. After the study participants analyzed the dimensions, two criteria were excluded. Fourteen experts concluded the study. The final matrix showed the need for CHW to be trained in several oral health topics. This study provides an objective framework of the work process of CHW in oral health and shows their ability to perform oral health promotion, surveillance, prevention, and education actions.
33729360 Accidents are frequent in childhood because of the lower risk perception and greater vulnerability to disasters. This study aimed to analyze the knowledge and attitudes of schoolchildren concerning the prevention of accidents and associated factors. This is a cross-sectional and quantitative study conducted in November and December/2017 in Simão Dias, Sergipe, Brazil. Ninety-seven schoolchildren aged between 7 and 9 years of age from a sample calculation were evaluated through interviews with representative images. The results showed that little more than half of the children consider the use of personal protective equipment as a way of preventing injuries in case of accidents (58.8%; n=57), and is infrequent among those with low education level (PR: 0.66; 95%CI: 0.16- 0.99). The knowledge or use of this equipment was 60.8% (n=59) for safety belt, 54.6% (n=53) for helmet, 47.4% (n=46) for knee pad and 40.2% (n=39) for elbow support. Regarding attitudes, 20.6% (n=20) answered that there is no problem putting their (unwashed) hand on the wound and 12.4% (n=12) crossing the street accompanied without an adult. It was concluded that the knowledge and attitudes of schoolchildren concerning the prevention of accidents are misguided.
33729362 The scope of this study was to estimate the prevalence of excess weight and a sedentary lifestyle among Brazilian students between 13 and 17 years of age and investigate the magnitude of the socioeconomic inequalities related to these outcomes. A cross-sectional study was carried out based on data from the National School Health Survey (PeNSE) conducted in 2015. Inequalities were evaluated using the Absolute and Relative Index of Inequality. The prevalence of excess weight in Brazil was 24.2%, ranging from 20.7% in the Northeast Region to 27.8% in the Southern Region. The prevalence of a sedentary lifestyle in Brazil was 67.8%, ranging from 61.8 % in the North Region to 70.3% in the Southeast Region. The direct and positive association between better socioeconomic conditions and the prevalence of excess weight and a sedentary lifestyle indicate health inequities in Brazil. The results of this study point to the need to restructure and reinforce public policies directed at adolescents, which should have as guidelines the promotion of a healthy lifestyle and the reduction of health inequities.
33729363 The scope of the study was to assess food consumption according to the level of processing and the ingestion of nutrients among adolescents in the rural areas of Pelotas-RS. It involved a cross-sectional census-type study with 462 students in grades 6 through 9 of elementary school from 21 municipal schools in the rural area. Food consumption was evaluated by 24-hour dietary recall (24HR), with food products being classified into four groups according to the level of processing in line with the NOVA classification. The average daily energy intake was 1,921 calories, namely 48.2% from in natura or minimally processed food and 31.9% from ultra-processed food. The products that contributed most to the total daily calory intake were rice, meat, legumes, sugar, homemade bread, cookies, candies, soda, and artificial juices. A higher proportion of macro and micronutrients was observed from ingestion of in natura or minimally processed food, although carbohydrates, fat and iron contents derived from ultra-processed food was also high. The results of the study indicate that adolescents in rural areas have a higher energy intake from fresh or minimally processed food, however, it is observed that ultra-processed food is also part of their diet, thereby revealing the nutritional transition.
33729364 The scope of this article is to verify the factors associated with providing educational guidance related to oral health during prenatal care in the Metropolitan Region of Greater Vitória - ES, Brazil. It involved a cross-sectional study of 1,035 postpartum women in public or affiliated private hospitals in the SUS in 2010. A descriptive analysis of the main educational information and binomial logistic regression was conducted to test the association between individual and contextual variables and 'receiving educational guidance through meetings and/or pregnant mother groups in the health unit and/or through home visits'. The information given most during prenatal care was 'the advantage of exclusive breastfeeding until six months of life' (52.0%) and least was 'the importance of fluoride use in health' (18.9%). Being attended by the Family Health Strategy (FHS) (OR=1.94), having adequate living conditions for women and children (OR=1.73) and an additional prenatal visit (OR=1.08), increased the chance of providing educational guidance in prenatal care. Frequent pre-natal visits, coverage of health services in line with the FHS, and adequate conditions of housing were factors that were positively associated with educational guidance during prenatal care.
33729365 The use of media by children in early childhood is increasingly common, and it is necessary to investigate the determinants of screen time, which is understood as the total child screen exposure time, including television and interactive media. This is a descriptive, exploratory, and cross-sectional study conducted with 180 children between 24 and 42 months of age, allocated in Group 1, less than two hours daily screen exposure time; Group 2, daily screen exposure time equal to or more than two hours. Bivariate and binary logistic regression analyses were performed. Screen time determining factors studied were family environment, evaluated with the Family Environment Resource Inventory; socioeconomic factors; nutritional status and child development status, evaluated with the Bayley III test. As a result, 63% of children had daily screen time exceeding two hours, and television still is the main culprit for children screen exposure. We observed that screen time exposure was positively associated with family resources, economic level, and language development. However, only the last two factors explained the longer screen time.
33729366 The Visual Analogue Scale (VAS), Roland Morris Disability Questionnaire (RMDQ), Short Form Health Survey (SF-36) are broadly used and had their content linked to ICF by the linking rules of 2002 and 2005. In 2016 were refined and were not applied yet. To apply the refinements of ICF linking rules to VAS, RMDQ, and SF-36. Two health professionals identified the meaningful concepts and linked to the most precise ICF categories and a third triggered in divergences. The degree of agreement was calculated by kappa statistic. There was almost perfect agreement (Kappa=0.93 p<0,001). The main concept of VAS was linked to ICF category b280, the 24 main concepts of RMDQ linked to b28013, and 27 additional linked to other categories. The SF-36 had 36 main concepts and 30 additional concepts identified which 27 were definable by the ICF and 17 do not. From the total of ICF linked concepts, 39 refer to Body Functions, 57 to Activities and Participation and 4 to Environmental Factors. The refinements of linking rules propitiated more clarity in the process to identify, to link instruments content with ICF and to expose the results. Thus, increased the number of identified and linked concepts as well as the categories in the instruments.
33729367 The objective of this study was to assess the provision of information on the amount of sugar and identify the position of sugar in the list of ingredients of processed foods. A cross-sectional study was conducted to analyze all processed traditional and diet/light/zero food products sold in a hypermarket containing the word sugar or sucrose in the list of ingredients. The food labels were read and the position of sugar on the list of ingredients and presence, or absence, of information on the amount of sugar in the nutrition facts table were recorded. Information on the amount of sugar was also requested from the manufacturers by e-mail or telephone. A total of 2,200 food products were assessed, 2,164 (98.4%) of which were traditional foods and 36 (1.6%) diet/light/zero foods. The amount of sugar was declared in only 14.4% and 13.9% of these products, respectively (p=0.84). Only 7.7% (n=12) of the 156 companies contacted provided the requested information. Sugar was present in the first three positions of the list of ingredients in 75.8% of the traditional foods and 77.8% of the diet/light/zero foods (p=0.93). The data show that sugar was the main ingredient in the majority of the food products analyzed and that the level of provision of information on the amount of sugar is low.
33729368 Home visits are a technology used in mental health services to address individuals with mental distress and their families. The intent is to analyze different types of knowledge and professional practices related to home visits, grounded on the analytical framework provided by the Psychiatric Reform's dimensions, namely: theoretical-conceptual, technical assistance, legal-political, and sociocultural. This case study with a qualitative approach was conducted in a Psychosocial Care Center (CAPS) located in Fortaleza, Ceará, Brazil. Observation and semi-structured interviews were held with workers and later analyzed from a critical hermeneutic perspective. The results show the territory covered by the service is acknowledged as a social space in which individuals are allowed to express their experience/suffering and a place where care is produced. Home visits require the reorganization of work processes and the development of deinstitutionalization strategies, which in turn promote the patients' autonomy and contractual power. There are, however, challenges to be overcome, such as insufficient human resources and a lack of material resources. Additionally, workers have to deal with urban violence and impediments to cultural change in the way society deals with mental illness. Home visits are essential within CAPS as a strategy to dismantle the traditional asylum apparatus.
33729369 The objective of this article is to analyze the spatial distribution of Hepatitis B vaccine (HBVAC) of pregnant women. This is a cross-sectional study carried with 266 puerperae. The HBVAC record was obtained through the prenatal care booklet. The spatial scanning technique was used to detect a cluster of risk for the presence or absence of an HBVAC record. After this cluster identification, the individual and environmental variables were compared between the Coverage Areas of Basic Health Units (CAs-BHUs). The mean prevalence of non-HBVAC was 88.34%. Scan spatial scan analysis observed a cluster of a high prevalence of puerperae with a HBVAC record. Comparative analyses have shown that paid work and the number of prenatal visits are positively associated with an HBVAC record. Given the above, this work brings a reflection on possible disparities with other CAs-BHUs, besides the influence of the environmental perspective. It should be emphasized that the vaccination situation is influenced not only by factors intrinsic to the individuals. However, in this study, the results indicate that individual variables are predominantly mandatory in the decision of HBVAC uptake among pregnant women.
33729375 To analyze association between dental pain, use of dental services and school absenteeism in Brazilian adolescents. This was a cross-sectional study with data from the National School Health Survey (PeNSE 2015). The study's dependent variable was school absenteeism due to health reasons in the last 12 months. Socioeconomic characteristics, dental pain and use of dental services were the independent variables evaluated. Logistic regression was used to estimate odds ratios (OR) and respective 95% confidence intervals (95%CI). Data on 102,072 schoolchildren were included. Absenteeism prevalence due to health reasons was 53.7% (95%CI 53.2;54.3). In the adjusted analysis, there was association between dental pain and school absenteeism (OR=1.35 - 95%CI 1.26;1.45), and an increase in absenteeism occurrence the greater the number of dental visits. The results suggest that dental pain and frequency of dental visits may be related to school absenteeism.
33729376 To describe cases of human rabies in Ceará State, Brazil between 1970 and 2019. This was a descriptive study using secondary data from the Ceará State Department of Health and the state reference hospital. Of 171 cases, 75.7% occurred in males, 60.0% in <19-year-olds, and 56.0% in urban areas. Rabies was transmitted by dogs in 74.0% of cases, marmosets in 16.7% and bats in 7.3%. Between 1970 and 1978, there was an increase of cases (using the Joinpoint Regression Program, annual percentage change [APC] = 13.7 - 95%CI 4.6;41.5), while between 1978 and 2019 there was a decrease (APC = -6.7 - 95%CI -8.8;-5.9). There was a reduction in transmission by dogs (71 cases, last case in 2010) and an increase by sylvatic animals (5 cases since 2005). This study demonstrates changes in rabies transmission dynamics during the period studied, with a reduction in transmission by dogs and an increase of transmission by sylvatic animals.
33729398 This article summarizes the chapter on epidemiological surveillance of sexually transmitted infections (STI) that forms part of the Clinical Protocol and Treatment Guidelines (PDCT) for Comprehensive Care for People with STI 2020), published by the Health Surveillance Secretariat of the Ministry of Health of Brazil. It presents some reflections on the new case definitions for surveillance of acquired syphilis, syphilis in pregnant women and congenital syphilis. The PCDT-IST 2020 was developed based on scientific evidence and validated in discussions with specialists. Epidemiological and clinical aspects are addressed, as well as guidelines for health service managers regarding programmatic and operational management of these diseases, guidelines for health professionals on screening, diagnosing and treating people with STIs and their sex partners, in addition to strategies for surveillance, prevention and control actions.
33729399 Infections that cause cervicitis are a topic presented in the 'Clinical Protocol and Therapeutic Guidelines for Comprehensive Care for People with Sexually Transmitted Infections', published by the Brazilian Ministry of Health in 2020. The document was developed based on scientific evidence and validated in discussions with experts. This article presents epidemiological and clinical aspects of infections that cause cervicitis, as well as recommendations on screening, diagnosis and treatment of affected people and their sexual partnerships. In addition, it discusses strategies for surveillance, prevention and control of these infections for health professionals and health service managers involved in the programmatic and operational management of sexually transmitted infections. Expanding access to diagnostic tests and early treatment are crucial for controlling the spread of pathogens that cause cevicitis.
33729400 HIV infection is the subject of one of the chapters of the 'Clinical Protocol and Therapeutic Guidelines for Comprehensive Care for People with Sexually Transmitted Infections', published by the Brazilian Ministry of Health in 2020. It is important that health professionals and managers learn the signs and symptoms of HIV infection and know how to diagnose it, in order to provide appropriate treatment and reduce complications. HIV infection has become a chronic disease and its treatment includes addressing common comorbidities in clinical practice such as arterial hypertension, diabetes and dyslipidemia, in addition to cardiac risk assessment, cancer prevention and guidance on immunization. Initiation of treatment for all HIV patients, regardless of clinical or immunological criteria, adopted by the Ministry of Health since 2013, has now been simplified with more tolerable first-line medications and with fewer drug interactions, which makes its management easy to implement, including by Primary Health Care.
33729401 The topic of vaginal discharge is one of the chapters of the Clinical Protocol and Therapeutic Guidelines for Comprehensive Care for People with Sexually Transmitted Infections, published by the Brazilian Ministry of Health in 2020. The chapter has been developed based on scientific evidence and validated in discussions with specialists. This article presents epidemiological and clinical aspects related to vaginal discharge conditions, as well as guidelines for health service managers and health professionals about screening, diagnosing and treating these conditions, which are one of the main complaints among women seeking health services, and which may be caused by infectious or non-infectious factors. In addition, information is presented on strategies for surveillance, prevention and control actions, in order to promote knowledge of the problem and provision of quality care and effective treatment.
33729402 The topics of congenital syphilis and children exposed to syphilis are part of the Clinical Protocol and Therapeutic Guidelines for Comprehensive Care for People with Sexually Transmitted Infections, published by the Brazilian Ministry of Health in 2020. The Protocol and Guidelines have been developed based on scientific evidence and validated in discussions with specialists. This article provides guidelines for clinical management of both syphilis in pregnant women and also congenital syphilis, emphasizing prevention of vertical transmission of Treponema pallidum. Epidemiological and clinical aspects of these infections are presented, as well as recommendations for health service managers regarding the programmatic and operational management of syphilis. The article also includes guidelines for health professionals on screening, diagnosing and treating people with sexually transmitted infections and their sex partners, in addition to strategies for syphilis surveillance, prevention and control actions.
33729403 The topic of sexually transmitted enteric infections is one of the chapters of the Clinical Protocol and Therapeutic Guidelines for Comprehensive Care for People with Sexually Transmitted Infections, published by the Brazilian Ministry of Health in 2020. The document was developed based on scientific evidence and validated in discussions with specialists. This article presents epidemiological and clinical aspects related to these infections, as well as guidance for service managers on their programmatic and operational management. The aim is to assist health professionals with screening, diagnosis and treatment of people with sexually transmitted enteric infections and their sexual partners, in addition to supporting strategies for their surveillance, prevention and control.
33729404 This article addresses sexual violence, a topic that makes up the Clinical Protocol and Therapeutic Guidelines for Comprehensive Care for People with Sexually Transmitted Infections, published by the Ministry of Health of Brazil. Guidance is given to managers in programmatic and operational management with a focus on the service network for people in situations of sexual violence, recommendations to health professionals about prophylactic measures of pregnancy and viral and non-viral sexually transmitted infections, in addition to strategies for surveillance actions. Sexual violence is a broad problem that goes beyond the health field and involves conceptual and programmatic challenges for both health professionals, who are at the forefront of care for affected people, and for society, in terms of possible forms of prevention.
33729405 Pelvic Inflammatory Disease is a topic included in the Clinical Protocol and Therapeutic Guidelines for Comprehensive Care for People with Sexually Transmitted Infections, published by the Brazilian Ministry of Health in 2020. Pelvic inflammatory disease is an acute infection of the upper female genital tract due to canalicular spread of endogenous cervicovaginal microorganisms, in particular sexually transmitted organisms. Standing out among the etiological agents involved are Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae. The most important sequels are chronic pelvic pain, infertility and ectopic pregnancy. Clinical diagnosis is the most important practical approach. Antibiotic treatment should start immediately upon clinical suspicion. The article contains guidance for health service managers and health professionals on diagnostic tests, treatment, follow-up, counseling, notification, handling of sexual partnerships and special populations. In view of increased availability of the molecular biology technique in Brazil, C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae screening is recommended as a disease prevention strategy.
33729406 This manuscript is related to the chapter about human T-cell lymphotropic virus (HTLV) that is part of the Clinical Protocol and Therapeutic Guidelines for Comprehensive Care for People with Sexually Transmitted Infections, published by the Brazilian Health Ministry. HTLV-1/2 infection is a worldwide public health problem and Brazil has the largest number of individuals living with the virus. HTLV-1 causes a variety of clinical manifestations of a neoplastic nature, such as adult leukemia/T-cell lymphoma, and also of an inflammatory nature, such as HTLV-1-associated myelopathy, as well as other manifestations such as uveitis, arthritis and infective dermatitis. These pathologies have high morbidity and mortality and negatively impact the quality of life of infected individuals. This review includes relevant information for health service managers and workers regarding virus transmission modes, diagnosis, treatment and monitoring of individuals living with HTLV-1 and 2 in Brazil.
33729407 This article addresses vector, sexual and vertical transmission of Zika virus, a topic covered in the Clinical Protocol and Therapeutic Guidelines for Comprehensive Care for People with Sexually Transmitted Infections, published by the Brazilian Ministry of Health in 2020. Although in Brazil Zika virus is transmitted most predominantly by Aedes aegypti, the vertical and sexual transmission routes are of significant importance for reproductive health. Sexual transmission demands the use of specific prophylactic interventions, including the use of male or female condoms, especially among couples planning pregnancy. Vertical transmission is linked to severe structural abnormalities of the central nervous system and there is still no vaccine or known pharmacological resources that can prevent it. As the disease is predominantly asymptomatic, failure to comply with basic principles of care and guidelines related to the spread of infection transcends the severity of the symptoms of the disease.
33729409 The Clinical Protocol and Therapeutic Guidelines for Comprehensive Care for People with Sexually Transmitted Infections, published by the Ministry of Health of Brazil in 2020, includes the update on acquired syphilis. The document comprises rapid tests use, safety and efficacy of the administration of benzathine benzylpenicillin, follow-up of cases, clinical and laboratory management of neurosyphilis, approach to sexual partnerships, assistance and monitoring of diagnosed pregnant women, and specificities of syphilis and HIV co-infection, as well as a summary of the notification of cases. It is necessary to train health managers and professionals on a continuous basis, with a view to integrating care and surveillance, strengthening effective syphilis control actions, increasing the search for sexual partnerships, and expanding the access of the most vulnerable populations to health services.
33729410 This article aims to present concepts and clinical practices recommended to approach people with an active sex life. These concepts are an integral part of the recommendations of the Clinical Protocol and Therapeutic Guidelines for Comprehensive Care for People with Sexually Transmitted Infections (STI), published by the Ministry of Health of Brazil in 2020.The article proposes a comprehensive approach to sexuality for health promotion and presents important aspects of the communication process that must develop clearly, without prejudice and judgment, with a focus on sexual and reproductive health. It also highlights relevant points about the exercise of sexuality at specific stages of life, recommending assessment of risks and vulnerabilities, as well as screening for STI and condom use. In this way, it is possible to contribute so that people can exercise their sexuality fully, responsibly and safely.
33729411 The recommendations for diagnostic tests for investigating syphilis are part of the Clinical Protocol and Therapeutic Guidelines for Comprehensive Care for People with Sexually Transmitted Infections and the Technical Manual for Syphilis Diagnosis, published by the Brazilian Ministry of Health. These recommendations were developed based on scientific evidence and discussions with a panel of experts. Aiming to contribute to the efforts of health service managers and health professionals in qualifying health care, this article presents the use of direct tests to detect Treponema pallidum in lesions, as well as algorithms that combine treponemal and non-treponemal antibody tests to assist in the diagnosis of syphilis. The article also covers use of non-treponemal tests to investigate neurosyphilis and guidelines for interpreting non-treponemal antibody titers in monitoring treatment and diagnosis of congenital syphilis, as well as prospects for innovations in diagnosis. The important role of rapid immunochromatographic treponemal tests for public health and for addressing syphilis is also highlighted.
33729412 This article approach infections that cause urethral discharge, theme which is part of the Clinical Protocol and Therapeutic Guidelines for Comprehensive Care for People with Sexually Transmitted Infections, published by the Ministry of Health of Brazil in 2020. These guidelines were prepared based on scientific evidence and validated in discussions with experts. When urethritis is not treated correctly, or when the microorganism develops antimicrobial resistance, it can cause serious and even irreversible health damage. It is noteworthy that the high levels of antimicrobial resistance developed by pathogens that causes urethritis comprises a global emergency in public health. This article presents epidemiological and clinical aspects, recommendations on diagnostic and treatment, and strategies for surveillance, prevention and control actions of infections that cause urethral discharge, with the purpose of contributing with managers and health professionals to care qualification.
33729413 Infections that cause genital ulcers are one of the themes comprising the Clinical Protocol and Therapeutic Guidelines for Comprehensive Care for People with Sexually Transmitted Infections, published by the Brazilian Ministry of Health in 2020. The Protocol and Guidelines have been developed based on scientific evidence and validated in discussions with specialists. This article addresses clinical genital ulcer syndrome caused by sexually transmitted infections, and its most common etiological agents: Treponema pallidum (syphilis), herpes simplex virus-2 (genital herpes) and herpes simplex virus-1 (perioral herpes), Haemophilus ducreyi (chancroid), Chlamydia trachomatis serotypes L1, L2 and L3 (venereal lymphogranuloma), and Klebsiella granulomatis (donovanosis). Epidemiological and clinical aspects of these infections are presented, as well as guidelines for their diagnosis and treatment, in addition to strategies for surveillance, prevention and control actions, with the purpose of supporting health managers and professionals in the qualification of care.
33729414 This article addresses human papillomavirus (HPV) infection, this being one of the topics covered by the Clinical Protocol and Therapeutic Guidelines for Comprehensive Care for People with Sexually Transmitted Infections, published by the Brazilian Ministry of Health. The Protocol and Guidelines have been developed based on scientific evidence and validated in discussions with specialists. This article presents epidemiological and clinical aspects, as well as guidelines for health service managers and health workers about diagnosing and treating people with papillomavirus infection. This theme is an important public health problem, since it is the most prevalent sexually transmitted infection in the world, capable of triggering the oncogenic process of cervical cancer, as well as the possibility anogenital warts occurring. Important information is presented for gaining knowledge about HPV, as well as action strategies for infection prevention and control, provision of quality care and effective treatment of the disease.
33729415 This article discusses viral hepatitis, a theme addressed by the Clinical Protocol and Therapeutic Guidelines to Comprehensive Care for People with Sexually Transmitted Infections and, more precisely, by the Clinical Protocols and Therapeutic Guidelines for Hepatitis B and Hepatitis C and Coinfections, published by the Brazilian Ministry of Health. Besides the broad spectrum of health impairment, hepatitis A, B and C viruses also present different forms of transmission, whether parenteral, sexual, vertical or oral. Among the strategies suggested for the control of viral hepatitis, in addition to behavioral measures, are expanded diagnosis, early vaccination against hepatitis A and hepatitis B viruses, and access to available therapeutic resources. Considering vertical transmission of the hepatitis B and hepatitis C viruses, screening for pregnant women with chronic hepatitis B and C is an important perinatal health strategy, indicating with precision those who can benefit from the prophylactic interventions.
33739489 Trichophyton benhamiae was diagnosed in a 9-year-old female dog by histopathological evaluation, fungal culture and confirmation by sequencing of the internal transcribed spacer region of ribosomal DNA. Successful therapy was achieved with itraconazole, bathing with miconazole and chlorhexidine shampoo, and topical application of sodium hypochlorite as a rinse.
33739551 Southern sea otters (Enhydra lutris nereis) rely on intact pelage for thermoregulation, and thus clinically significant demodicosis and associated alopecia can cause morbidity and death. This study aimed to describe lesions associated with follicular Demodex sp. infestation, estimate the prevalence and intensity of infestation, describe mite distribution across key anatomical regions, and assess mite presence or absence in relation to lesions and host risk factors. Twenty necropsied, wild southern sea otters that stranded along the central California coast from 2005 to 2018. Grossly normal and abnormal integument from the head, perineum, genitals, mamillary papillae and limbs was assessed microscopically for mites and mite-associated pathological findings. Intrafollicular mites were observed in the integument of 55% of otters and 20% had clinical demodicosis. Demodicosis was considered to be contributory to death or euthanasia in two cases. Although Demodex sp. mites often were observed microscopically in grossly normal skin, the presence of multiple densely-packed intrafollicular mites generally was associated with pigmentary incontinence, ectatic follicles, lymphoplasmacytic perifolliculitis, and neutrophilic and lymphoplasmacytic, dermal inflammation. Other findings included epidermal hyperplasia, orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis of epidermis and follicular epithelium, concurrent pyoderma and cell necrosis. Perioral integument, especially of the chin, had the highest prevalence of mites and the highest mite density, suggesting facial contact as a means of mite transmission. Our research confirmed demodectic mange as a contributor to morbidity and mortality in sea otters, with important implications for clinical care, rehabilitation and conservation.
33758437 We assess the expected long-run consequences of the unfolding COVID-19 pandemic and use these as a platform to argue that international business (IB) as a field should expand its research agenda to study the international division of labor. The worldwide response to the COVID-19 pandemic is accelerating the shift toward the de-globalization of capital, but it will also speed up the move to a stronger globalization of labor. This paradoxical, simultaneous occurrence of de-globalization and globalization offers rich opportunities for future IB research.
33772789 To update a systematic review of evidence published up to December 2015 for pharmacological/neurosurgical interventions among individuals with cerebral palsy (CP) and dystonia. Searches were updated (January 2016 to May 2020) for oral baclofen, trihexyphenidyl, benzodiazepines, clonidine, gabapentin, levodopa, botulinum neurotoxin (BoNT), intrathecal baclofen (ITB), and deep brain stimulation (DBS), and from database inception for medical cannabis. Eligible studies included at least five individuals with CP and dystonia and reported on dystonia, goal achievement, motor function, pain/comfort, ease of caregiving, quality of life (QoL), or adverse events. Evidence certainty was evaluated using GRADE. Nineteen new studies met inclusion criteria (two trihexyphenidyl, one clonidine, two BoNT, nine ITB, six DBS), giving a total of 46 studies (four randomized, 42 non-randomized) comprising 915 participants when combined with those from the original systematic review. Very low certainty evidence supported improved dystonia (clonidine, ITB, DBS) and goal achievement (clonidine, BoNT, ITB, DBS). Low to very low certainty evidence supported improved motor function (DBS), pain/comfort (clonidine, BoNT, ITB, DBS), ease of caregiving (clonidine, BoNT, ITB), and QoL (ITB, DBS). Trihexyphenidyl, clonidine, BoNT, ITB, and DBS may increase adverse events. No studies were identified for benzodiazepines, gabapentin, oral baclofen, and medical cannabis. Evidence evaluating the use of pharmacological and neurosurgical management options for individuals with CP and dystonia is limited to between low and very low certainty. What this paper adds Meta-analysis suggests that intrathecal baclofen (ITB) and deep brain stimulation (DBS) may improve dystonia and pain. Meta-analysis suggests that DBS may improve motor function. Clonidine, botulinum neurotoxin, ITB, and DBS may improve achievement of individualized goals. ITB and DBS may improve quality of life. No direct evidence is available for oral baclofen, benzodiazepines, gabapentin, or medical cannabis.
33775275 The COVID-19 pandemic poses unprecedented challenges for healthcare services and has led to changes in the usage pattern of the pediatric population. We aimed to describe the impact of COVID-19 on children's health, wellbeing, and access to medical care in Portugal. We conducted a cross-sectional study through an anonymous online survey via social media. The collected data refers to a period between the 16th of March and the 17th of May 2020. We obtained responses to the survey on 19 745 children. Of the previously scheduled outpatient consultations, 54.2% were postponed by healthcare institutions and 21.6% of planned vaccinations were missed. Parents expressed concerns regarding psychological, social, and physical consequences for their children due to the pandemic. The observed reduction of pediatric emergency department visits and the postponement of outpatient consultations and vaccine administrations are potentially harmful for non-COVID patients. The current pandemic and the imposed social distance might have an important negative impact on the mental health of children. Further studies are necessary to fully comprehend the outcomes of the decreased access to medical care, as well as the collateral damage for children beyond the clinical aspects of the pandemic. Defining strategies regarding the urge to vaccinate children and not postpone urgent evaluations should be a public health priority.
33781381 The international and national literature as well as studies carried out in universities in Portugal show there is excessive alcohol consumption and binge drinking. However, no relation with alcohol consumption and college parties has yet been established. The aim of this study was to assess the association between alcohol consumption and binge drinking with college parties, and also to understand specific patterns of alcohol consumption by gender and years of university attendance. A survey comprised of the 'Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test - Consumption' (AUDIT-C) and the question 'What is your most consumed drink?' referring to months without and with college parties, was disseminated in the University of Coimbra Facebook® page to students of the University of Coimbra and of the Polytechnic Institute of Coimbra seventeen years old and over. The AUDIT-C score in college party months is higher than in months without such parties with strong, positive and significant correlation (ρ = 0.711; ρ < 0.001). In months without college parties, 41.8% of females and 24.0% of males have a positive AUDIT-C. In months with college parties, 73.8% of females and 56.3% of males have a positive AUDIT-C. In months with college parties, females have higher risk of excessive consumption (ρ< 0.001) and drink a higher amount of spirits / shots. There is a significant difference in the most consumed drinks between genders (ρ < 0.001). Alcohol consumption is higher in those with less years in college attendance, but college parties seem to have a proportional impact regardless of the number of years of college attendance. In a month with college parties, there is more binge drinking and higher consumption than the daily maximum recommended amount. Males consume a higher amount of spirits / shots. College parties allow for more opportunities of pre-existing binge drinking. The way young people face alcohol consumption is a major problem to be addressed.
34075261 Digital global connectivity offers multinational enterprises new opportunities, but it also brings unique risks, an area not yet well examined in international business. This article presents an organizational information-processing framework, which elucidates what (risk types and sources), how (risk assessing and managing), and whom (vulnerable firms) these risks relate to, in a dialectical manner that seeks to combine theoretical insights and managerial actions. We focus on three types of risks (digital interdependence, information security, and regulatory complexity) that MNEs uniquely face, and explain within-country and cross-country risk drivers. We document variances among MNEs in exposure to these risks, proposing that information flow intensity, geographic diversity, international strategy, and global platform participation carry strong implications on the firm's risk exposure and response. Finally, this framework offers actions essential for MNEs, individually and collectively, to manage digital risks, emphasizing processes of building and deploying digital intelligence in pursuit of transnational resilience for cross-border activities that become increasingly digitally connected.
34076063 Hypertensive patients undergoing treatment and assessed only by casual blood pressure (BP) measurement may be subject to mistaken decisions. To assess BP behavior by measuring its levels at the office (casual) and at home (HBPM), the behavior of different classes of antihypertensive drugs, and the prevalence of uncontrolled white-coat hypertension (UCWCH) and uncontrolled masked hypertension (UCMH). Cross-sectional study assessing patients who underwent BP monitoring in the TeleMRPA platform between 2017 and 2019. The exclusion criteria were: use of no antihypertensive drug; combined use of 3 or more antihypertensive drugs; and use of spironolactone and alpha-2 agonist. The variables analyzed were: age, sex, body mass index (BMI), number of valid BP measurements, means of systolic and diastolic blood pressure (SBP and DBP, respectively) obtained from HBPM and casual measurement, and the classes of antihypertensive drugs. Paired and unpaired t tests, as well as chi-square test, were used. The 5% significance level was adopted. This study selected 22 446 patients, 6731 of whom met the inclusion criteria [61.3%, female sex; mean age, 57.8 (±12.6) years; mean BMI, 29.0 (±5.1) kg/m2]. Mean SBP and DBP were 6.6 mm Hg (p<0.001) and 4.4 mm Hg (p<0.001) higher in casual measurement than in HBPM. The rates of BP control were 57.0% in casual measurement and 61.3% in HBPM (p<0.001), and the prevalence of UCWCH and UCMH was 15.4% and 11.1%, respectively. Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system blockade was observed in 74.6% of the patients, and 54.8% were on single-drug therapy. HBPM should be considered for the follow-up of treated hypertensive patients because of the high prevalence of UCWCH and UCMH. Antihypertensive drugs behaved differently in HBPM. (Arq Bras Cardiol. 2021; [online].ahead print, PP.0-0).
34076063 Hypertensive patients undergoing treatment and assessed only by casual blood pressure (BP) measurement may be subject to mistaken decisions. To assess BP behavior by measuring its levels at the office (casual) and at home (HBPM), the behavior of different classes of antihypertensive drugs, and the prevalence of uncontrolled white-coat hypertension (UCWCH) and uncontrolled masked hypertension (UCMH). Cross-sectional study assessing patients who underwent BP monitoring in the TeleMRPA platform between 2017 and 2019. The exclusion criteria were: use of no antihypertensive drug; combined use of 3 or more antihypertensive drugs; and use of spironolactone and alpha-2 agonist. The variables analyzed were: age, sex, body mass index (BMI), number of valid BP measurements, means of systolic and diastolic blood pressure (SBP and DBP, respectively) obtained from HBPM and casual measurement, and the classes of antihypertensive drugs. Paired and unpaired t tests, as well as chi-square test, were used. The 5% significance level was adopted. This study selected 22 446 patients, 6731 of whom met the inclusion criteria [61.3%, female sex; mean age, 57.8 (±12.6) years; mean BMI, 29.0 (±5.1) kg/m<sup>2</sup>]. Mean SBP and DBP were 6.6 mm Hg (p<0.001) and 4.4 mm Hg (p<0.001) higher in casual measurement than in HBPM. The rates of BP control were 57.0% in casual measurement and 61.3% in HBPM (p<0.001), and the prevalence of UCWCH and UCMH was 15.4% and 11.1%, respectively. Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system blockade was observed in 74.6% of the patients, and 54.8% were on single-drug therapy. HBPM should be considered for the follow-up of treated hypertensive patients because of the high prevalence of UCWCH and UCMH. Antihypertensive drugs behaved differently in HBPM. (Arq Bras Cardiol. 2021; [online].ahead print, PP.0-0)
34076064 The beneficial effects of Elabela on the cardiovascular system have been shown in studies. To compare serum Elabela levels of chronic total occlusion (CTO) patients with control patients with normal coronary arteries, and to investigate whether there is a correlation with collateral development. The study was planned cross-sectionally and prospectively. Fifty patients (28.0% female, mean age 61.6±7.3years) with CTO in at least one coronary vessel and 50 patients (38% female, mean age 60,7±6.38 years) with normal coronary arteries were included in the study. Patients in the CTO group were divided into two groups as Rentrop 0-1, those with weak collateral development, and Rentrop 2-3 with good collateral development. In addition to the age, sex, demographic characteristics and routine laboratory tests of the patients, Elabela levels were measured. Demographic characteristics and laboratory values were similar in both groups. While the mean NT-proBNP and troponin were higher in the CTO group, the Elabela mean was lower (p <0.05 for all). In the multivariate regression analysis, NT-proBNP and Elabela levels were found to be independent predictors for CTO. Also, Elabela level was found to be statistically higher in Rentrop class 2-3 patients compared to Rentrop class 0-1 patients (p<0.05). In our study, we showed that the average Elabela level was low in CTO patients compared to normal patients. In addition, we found the level of Elabela to be lower in patients with weak collateral development compared to patients with good collateral development. (Arq Bras Cardiol. 2021; [online].ahead print, PP.0-0).
34076064 The beneficial effects of Elabela on the cardiovascular system have been shown in studies. To compare serum Elabela levels of chronic total occlusion (CTO) patients with control patients with normal coronary arteries, and to investigate whether there is a correlation with collateral development. The study was planned cross-sectionally and prospectively. Fifty patients (28.0% female, mean age 61.6±7.3years) with CTO in at least one coronary vessel and 50 patients (38% female, mean age 60,7±6.38 years) with normal coronary arteries were included in the study. Patients in the CTO group were divided into two groups as Rentrop 0-1, those with weak collateral development, and Rentrop 2-3 with good collateral development. In addition to the age, sex, demographic characteristics and routine laboratory tests of the patients, Elabela levels were measured. Demographic characteristics and laboratory values were similar in both groups. While the mean NT-proBNP and troponin were higher in the CTO group, the Elabela mean was lower (p <0.05 for all). In the multivariate regression analysis, NT-proBNP and Elabela levels were found to be independent predictors for CTO. Also, Elabela level was found to be statistically higher in Rentrop class 2-3 patients compared to Rentrop class 0-1 patients (p<0.05). In our study, we showed that the average Elabela level was low in CTO patients compared to normal patients. In addition, we found the level of Elabela to be lower in patients with weak collateral development compared to patients with good collateral development.
34076089 To identify factors associated with a higher probability of survival for men aged 60 and over in the course of almost 15 years. Prospective cohort study, where time zero is the year 2000 and deaths (final event) were measured until November 2014. The independent variables were obtained from personal characteristics, childhood life, educational status, lifestyle, social support, work history, socioeconomic situation, and health condition. At the end of the period, 25.8% of elderly men remained alive and the factors that stood out associated with a higher probability of survival were: performing 50% or more of the Basic and/or Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (95%CI 0.41 - 0.64), being the head of the family (95%CI 0.42 - 0.82), participating in the community (95%CI 0.52 - 0.88), working on their own (95%CI 0.54 - 0.88), and owning a home and goods (95%CI 0.56 - 0.92). Characteristics related to a greater autonomy of the elderly men, even after almost 15 years, contributed to an increase in the probability of survival.
34076090 To analyze the different profiles of dental service use by the Brazilian elderly and their possible association with sociodemographic factors, comorbidities, functionality and self-perception of oral health. Cross-sectional population-based study, using secondary data from the National Health Survey (PNS) of 2013. The sample size was 2,969 elderly individuals. Latent Class Analysis was used to construct the dependent variable 'profile of dental service use' from questions related to this profile. The independent variables formed 3 blocks: sociodemographic; comorbidities; functionalities and self-perception of oral health. The Rao-Scott Test and Standardized Residue Analysis tested the association. To measure the effect of covariates, Odds Ratio was estimated using a multiple hierarchical model of multinomial logistic regression. Significance level was 5%. Three latent classes were identified: Direct Disbursement Profile, Health Plan Profile and the Unified Health System (SUS) Profile. White elderly people were associated with the Direct Disbursement and Health Plans profile. The Health Plan profile was more associated with the married marital status or living with a spouse. In the multiple model, low schooling was associated with the profile of SUS users and elderly people diagnosed with cancer with the Health Plan profile. Self-perceiving oral health as bad or very bad increased the chances of belonging to the SUS profile. Latent Class Analysis proved to be a powerful strategy for a subtle and detailed understanding of the profile of dental service use and its relationship with associated factors.
34076095 Diabetes mellitus is one of the most prevalent diseases worldwide and is among the leading causes of loss of healthy years of life, which is aggravated in Brazil by accelerated population aging. This study aims to measure the problem of diabetes mellitus and its complications and characterize healthcare for diabetics in Brazil, according to regions. Prevalence rates were estimated using a multinomial regression model, and characterization of healthcare was based on triangulation between the Brazilian National Health Survey (PNS), the National Program for Improving Access and Quality in Primary Care (PMAQ-AB), and data from the Popular Pharmacy program. Diabetes prevalence in Brazil was 9.2%, according to the multinomial model, and prevalence in the corrected PNS (self-report + altered glycated hemoglobin - HbA1c ≥ 6.5) was 9.4%. The proportion of diabetes mellitus underreporting in the country was 42.5%, reaching 72.8% in the North. Among individuals diagnosed with diabetes mellitus, half presented HbA1c ≥ 6.5. Insufficient fundus eye examination (only 40% on average), with major regional variation (North 25% - Southeast 52%), is reflected in the high prevalence of retinopathy. Insufficient examination of feet (only 30%), can lead to more amputations. About 80% of diabetics used medications, indicating a persistently high proportion still without treatment. Healthcare deficiencies for diabetics lead to greater morbidity, hospitalizations (15%), and visits to emergency departments (27%, PMAQ). The scenario in 2012, although not ideal, occurred in a context of strengthening of the Brazilian Unified National Health System (SUS). The growing prevalence of diabetes mellitus and cutbacks in public health budgeting call for serious reflection on control of the disease in the coming years.
34076098 Colorectal cancer presents high incidence worldwide, but case-fatality is higher in developing countries. The study's objective was to analyze sociodemographic and clinical factors associated with delay in the initiation of treatment for colorectal cancer in hospitals in Brazil. This is a retrospective study of data from hospital cancer registries in Brazil from 2006 to 2015. The target variable is time to initiation of treatment for colorectal cancer and possible associations between sociodemographic variables and clinical factors. The analysis revealed disparities in time to treatment according to sociodemographic strata and geographic regions. Higher odds of treatment delay were associated with age over 50 years, black race/color (OR = 1.50; 95%CI: 1.21-1.84) and brown race/color (OR = 1.28; 95%CI: 1.17-1.42), illiteracy or low schooling (OR = 1.50; 95%CI: 1.19-1.90), and treatment in a city far from the patient's residence (OR = 1.25; 95%CI: 1.14-1.38). For rectal cancer, higher odds of treatment delay were associated with age over 50 years, black (OR = 1.44; 95%CI: 1.20-1.72) or brown race/color (OR = 1.29; 95%CI: 1.19-1.39), illiteracy or low schooling (OR = 1.71; 95%CI: 1.40-2.09), and treatment in a city far from the patient's residence (OR = 1.35; 95%CI: 1.25-1.47). In conclusion, greater attention should be given to reducing the time to initiation of treatment in underprivileged regions and in social strata identified with barriers to timely treatment access.
34076099 Recent decades have witnessed important transformations in public services that involve changes in the State's role as central agent in the regulation of public-private relations and the definition of levels of public financing. Health system reform proposals are part of the process of social transformations that have affected various nations. However, changes in the linkage between different dimensions are the result of both broad processes of social transformation and specific experiences and timelines, essential for understanding the results of this process. In recent decades, the British National Health Service (NHS) underwent the most important reform process since its creation in 1948. This process began with a set of measures implemented by the Conservative government in 1991, which were continued through alterations introduced in 1997 and 2002. An analysis of the NHS reform not only provides elements for understanding the current debate sparked by the initiatives led by Boris Johnson and aimed at a new NHS reform starting in 2021; such analysis also allows identifying convergences with other reform proposals in public health systems that were shaped under inspiration from the British model, as in the case of Brazil. The current article aims to discuss and analyse a case of health system reform that can be considered paradigmatic for the development of major trends in this field. The article seeks to specifically analyse the reform processes carried out since the 1990s in the NHS and their consequences for the health system's restructuring.
34076100 The experiences of homeless pregnant women create tensions in the public debate between individual guarantees and limits on State interventions. This article analyzes the scientific research on this issue, focusing on the biomedical, legal, and social arguments backing the positions in this debate. Based on an integrative review of Brazilian and international databases, the authors analyzed 21 studies and identified four propositions: Health risks for the woman and the fetus/child; Discourses on prenatal care; Rights of women and fetuses/children; and Meanings of motherhood. The article concludes that the experience of motherhood for these women is extremely complex, not only because of their homelessness, but due to the entire context, marked by unequal class, race, and gender relations. The Brazilian and international scenario features a discourse of protection and care for the fetus/infant that overrides care for the mother. The criminalization of homeless women's motherhood has been a global trend in which the expansion of 'fetal/infant' rights translates as a cutback in the women's rights. Such an approach fails to encourage homeless women to seek social and health services, rather discouraging them from doing so. An ethical and humanitarian imperative is to conceive different approaches to care, grounded in a human rights perspective so that care for the fetus/child does not translate as violence against the mother.
34076101 To present a proposal for speech-language pathology rehabilitation called the Therapy Program for Management of Chronic Cough (TMCC) for the treatment of refractory chronic cough. TMCC was developed based on two stages: literature and clinical analysis. The literature analysis stage was carried out through the following procedures: electronic and manual search for articles and books published until June 2019 that included adult participants with chronic cough and intervention with speech-language pathology therapy; selection of sources; analysis of articles and books included; and, preparation of the initial version of the therapy program. The initial version of the therapy program resulting from literature analysis stage was submitted to clinical analysis stage through the following procedures: analysis by three judges; revision of the proposal by the authors; judges' re-analysis; elaboration of the final version called the Therapy Program for Management of Chronic Cough (TMCC). TMCC synthesizes scientific knowledge and current clinical experience on the behavioral management of refractory chronic cough into a program with three main components, each one with specific objectives and strategies. TMCC consists of four sessions, with weekly frequency and duration between 30-45 minutes per session, executed in hierarchical phases, with specific objectives and strategies per session. TMCC is a program structured to offer global cough rehabilitation. To obtain scientific evidence about its effectiveness is necessary, so that it can be used in clinical practice.
34076103 Sea people are culturally differentiated by their way of life intertwined with sea fishing and their social and symbolic production. In northeastern Brazil, these people have been changing their living conditions. The Family Health Strategy (ESF) should strengthen links with different cultures to meet its basic principles. We aimed to reflect on the challenges of the ESF in the context of sea people. We conducted ethnographic research in the community of Redonda, Icapuí, State of Ceará, using dense descriptions constructed through the narratives of small-scale fishers and their families. We analyzed from the theoretical approach of studies in traditional communities. The results are shown in five themes: 1) The family has an extended dimension in communities established with relatives; 2) Fishing life temporalities govern the common acts of the land-sea dyad; 3) The shifts between being 'native' and 'outsider' create border areas that dialogue with the rituals of belonging; 4) Sea territorialization and the knowledge of experience; 5) The ESF in the arenas of struggles for environmental justice. Here, the production of health is reaffirmed as the production of sea people's life.
34076104 This research aimed to analyze the dwellers' knowledge of the territories, Pecém Port and Industrial Compound (CIPP), the quality of life of the communities living in the vicinity of the enterprises, and the prevalence of hypertension and overweight. This is a home-based, epidemiological survey of four areas of the Family Health Strategy (ESF) in São Gonçalo do Amarante and one area of the ESF in Caucaia, Ceará, Brazil. The study was carried out between 10/2017 and 03/2018. Anthropometric and blood pressure measurements were performed, and sociodemographic data and knowledge about community, the CIPP, and quality of life were collected. A total of 69.8% of the 503 adults interviewed were female, and the mean age was 44 years. Parada was the area reporting the highest percentage of problems related to air particles (51.1%), the worst concept regarding the CIPP (40.1% bad), the highest percentage of worse quality of life (29, 1%), and greater desire to move to another place (31.5%). Pecém had the highest percentage of community problems related to violence, consumption of illicit drugs, and prostitution. We concluded that there are signs of impact on local populations' health and quality of life without more significant direct work/income benefits.
34076105 This study assessed the Family Health Strategy (ESF) health care accessibility in the municipal system, which is the health macro-region headquarters in Bahia. It consisted of two levels of analysis: the municipal management and the local organization of ESF teams. Data production combined documentary analysis, non-participant observation, and interviews with managers, professionals, and users. Goal-image was used with evaluative criteria and dimensions of the accessibility in Primary Care. Family Health Teams (EqSF) still do not entirely fulfill the role of preferential contact in municipal health services, and the health care accessibility reflects the interdependence of municipal and local factors. Rural and peripheral teams performed better in organizational accessibility, and central urban teams performed better in geographic accessibility. The assessment focused on geographic and organizational criteria, combining different sources of evidence and health system players using analysis levels considering the municipal and local PHC management are relevant contributions of this study, which can be extended to other municipal systems with similar characteristics.
34076106 The work of Community Health Workers (ACS) was analyzed in light of Communities of Practice (CP) theory. This is a qualitative cross-sectional study carried out in four municipalities in Ceará. Six focus groups and six interviews were carried out with 45 Community Health Workers (ACS), observing ethical aspects. The data corpus was analyzed using the content analysis technique. The results show that ACS participation in the ESF is marked by experience in the community, and the main focus is monitoring priority groups. The practices put them before the diverse social and family complexities, generating reflections and building new meanings for themselves and their work process. The ACS CPs engage and share challenges and unique learning from work, characterized by close contact and relationships with the families of the territory, which reveals needs hardly perceived by other ESF professionals. The meaning of being ACS as one who listens, embraces, and perceives the needs of families invisible to services, is evident in the reification processes. The ACS better exercise their role as ESF articulators in the territories the greater the spaces for dialogue between them, the other team members, and management.
34076107 Community-based and workplace violence against health professionals has caused feelings of vulnerability, emotional exhaustion, and psychological changes, reflecting on sleep quality disorders. Thus, we aimed to analyze the association between community and workplace violence and the sleep quality of health professionals working in primary health care. The study was conducted with 286 health professionals who worked in PHC in one of the largest cities in Brazil. The primary outcome was sleep quality as assessed by the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index. Most of the participants (69.2%/p=0.074) were classified as 'bad sleepers', and nurses (73.3%/p=0.049) showed the worst sleep quality. Additionally, most professionals suffered some type of violence at work (p<0.001), which impaired professional activities (p=0.010), forcing them to change their behavior (p<0.001) and consider changing the workplace location (p=0.051). The results showed that professionals have been experiencing moments of fear, anxiety, and stress associated with workplace and community violence. This highlights the need for public policies geared to occupational health.
34076108 The study aimed to investigate the perception of doctors about the different hiring methods and their influence on the performance of the PHC essential attributes to analyze the formats that best contribute to its implementation and strengthening. This is a quantitative, cross-sectional research using a semi-structured form with 268 doctors from the ESF in Fortaleza, Ceará, Brazil. A unique sociodemographic profile was identified for each group evaluated, influencing the work process and opinions about hiring formats. The development of the essential PHC attributes was positively evaluated, but different perceptions were observed by professional hiring method assessed. The work performed by doctors in the ESF is influenced by how they are hired (p<0.001). Better performance of the statutory (4.4) was noted, followed by scholarship holders of the Mais Médicos Program/Primary Care Valorization Program (3.7), Consolidated Labor Laws (3.5), and, finally, those working with Self-Employed Payment Receipt (RPA) (2.4). We analyzed that hiring through the Brazilian Statutory Regime and RPA are, respectively, the best (85%) and the worst (96.6%) hiring formats.
34076109 The populations of lesbians, gays, bisexuals, transvestites, and transsexuals (LGBTT) have not had a place in the 'official history' of humanity, except as secondary actors that deviate, distort, or even tarnish popular memory, guided by cisheteronormativity. These same subjects often experience obstacles in the care provided by the Family Health Strategy (ESF) within a universal, comprehensive, and equitable system. This paper seeks to analyze experiences narrated by primary care professionals in health care for LGBTT populations in Teresina, Piauí, Brazil. This is qualitative research conducted with 32 professionals working at a PHC unit. The analysis was based on three dimensions - relational, organizational, and contextual - inspired by the Giovanella and Fleury theoretical discussion. Primary care, which should be one of those responsible for community health actions and prioritize health promotion and prevention, is the same that has provided denials, violence, and neglect in the care of LGBTT people. Therefore, we selected listening as one of the keys to respecting sexual and gender diversity so that these people are recognized as ESF users.
34076110 This study aimed to develop a prototype of the GISSA Mother-Baby ChatBot Application (GCBMB), a conversational agent to promote child health and evaluate the experience of use and satisfaction with this technological solution. This is a two-stage cross-sectional research with a mixed methodology. The first stage develops the settings of dialogue and the GCBMB prototype. The second stage evaluates the experience of using the ChatBot through a structured questionnaire where statements are used to assess the respondent's level of agreement using the Likert Scale and analyzes the application's use path through its database. The sample consisted of 142 puerperae, with a mean age of 25.4 years, where 38.1% were primiparous. The level of agreement of women with simplicity, good quality of information, clarity of content, usefulness, and satisfaction with the application was above 90%. Women between 26 and 30 years of age had a higher mean number of hits (5.21), settings accessed (9.26), and usage time (272 seconds) comparing younger and older women. The use of ChatBots on smartphones is encouraging to promote the health of children in Brazil. However, more investments are required to improve technological solutions and research with robust methodologies to evaluate their effectiveness.
34076111 Self-care is encouraged in the type 1 Diabetes Mellitus (DM1) setting. Thus, this research aimed to develop and validate a mobile application (APP) to promote self-care for adolescents with DM1. The method was divided into two stages: development and validation, ranging from literature review, benchmarking, prototype construction to validation by specialists. The APP construction was subsidized by the seven steps proposed by the American Association of Diabetes Educators. The screens were designed and possible functions were selected. After the design, the APP prototype was developed and named 'DM Agendinha'. The content validation process was mediated by the Suitability Assessment of Materials tool, where the percentage obtained was 85.3%, characterizing the APP as 'Superior Material'. The Smartphone Usability questionnaire was employed for technical validation, and the APP reached a global Content Validity Index of 0.96. We concluded, therefore, that the use of this material by adolescents will favor the acquisition of new knowledge and adherence to healthy practices, considering that it is a highly intelligible electronic technology.
34076112 The LARIISA collaborators group has been conducting research and development of technological solutions to support decision-making in health systems since 2009. GISSA, a cloud system resulting from the scientific and technological evolution of the LARIISA project, is among the solutions produced. This paper aims to describe the developing trend of GISSA©, a technological tool supporting the Family Health Strategy in northeastern Brazil, pointing out challenges, paths, and potentialities. This is a descriptive and exploratory study, based on secondary sources from the IBGE, INMET, SINAN, SIM, and SINASC, with quantitative analysis based on machine-learning techniques applied to create digital health microservices. Operating in the northeast and southeast regions, GISSA© provides information that qualifies health managers' decision-making process, improving the municipal health system's management.
34076113 Brazilian postgraduate education has grown in recent years, but there is a knowledge gap regarding whether the course's planned educational objective is being achieved. We aimed to evaluate the contribution of the Postgraduate Program in Family Health for the postgraduates' professional practice. This is a cross-sectional study conducted with 225 postgraduates from October 2019 to July 2020. Data were collected by an online questionnaire containing different sociodemographic and educational variables and competencies developed in the master's degree program and identifying the domains of Health Promotion Competencies. Most of the participants were female (78.2%), nurses (58.2%), public servants (64%), and SUS workers (93.3%). Two hundred and twenty-two (98.7%) postgraduates' final paper theme built on a practice-related issue. A high mean score was observed for all competencies analyzed. The mean scores for domains in Health Promotion competencies were high. We can conclude that the postgraduate program has contributed satisfactorily to the formation of critical, active masters, with competencies developed and being realized in professional practice.
34076114 The scope of this study is to discuss equity and access to mental health care by means of analysis of the distribution of primary care teams (Community Health Agents; Family Health Teams; the Expanded Family Health Nucleus) and the coverage of the Psychosocial Care Network in three Northeastern states (Ceará, Piauí and Rio Grande do Norte) and their respective health regions. It is a descriptive study, supported by exploratory quantitative analysis. For this purpose, the database of the Department of Basic Care/DATASUS was used to collect secondary data in relation to the historical trajectory of training of Primary Care teams. Regarding the points of care of RAPS, the database made available by the National Mental Health Coordination of the Ministry of Health was consulted. The conclusion of the investigation was that prior to 2018 there was a major drive in the country into the interior and expansion of coverage in relation to primary and psychosocial care, impacting the expansion of equity in territories of lesser economic and social development. However, it was also observed that Psychosocial Care Network services are more prevalent in the interior while the other related services are more developed in capitals and large municipalities.
34076115 The Family Health Strategy (FHS) of the Unified Health System (SUS) is the revised model that governs health care and the work processes adopted in Brazil. This article analyzes the perceptions of FHS professionals regarding mental health and the care provided in a health center in a Basic Care Unit in the Brazilian Northeast. It involved qualitative research aligned with a critical interpretative approach conducted through interviews, straightforward observation and documentary analysis that led to a series of considerations organized into two main groups: a) 'Mental Health' from the perspective of professionals of the FHS; and b) Care in 'Mental Health' in the context of practices of primary care. The results of the study reveal conceptions about mental health limited to a view aligned with a project of institutionalization and medicalization. With respect to the dimension of care, gaps are revealed in relation to shared experiences in mental health, through the incipient partnership between professionals of the FHS and the Nucleus of Support in Family Health (NSFH). The challenge remains to reconstruct a vision aligned with the precepts of Brazilian psychiatric reform, teamwork and the creation of spaces that enable discussion and agreements in the daily routine of the FHS.
34076116 This paper aims to describe the indicators related to planning and support in the work process reported by the Family Health Teams, from the 3rd cycle of the National Program for Improving Access and Quality of Primary Care (PMAQ-AB) in the Brazilian Northeast. This cross-sectional study employed secondary data from the external evaluation of the 3rd cycle of the PMAQ-AB. Sixteen indicators were used to ascertain the teams' work process actions, and 14,489 family health teams that adhered to the program were evaluated. Among the indicators assessed, we found that the teams held a meeting and planned actions and self-evaluated, monitored, and analyzed health indicators to reorganize the work process, highlighting the determining and conditioning factors. Health surveillance and the Extended Family Health Center (NASF) stand out in the indicators of institutional support and multidisciplinary support for solving complex cases. We identified improvements in the work process of the teams in the Northeast region, but the reality of fragmented and vertical work still requires a change to promote an outlook of shared teamwork, directly influencing the work process.
34076117 The scope of this article is to compare the assessment of users of health services who participated in the PMAQ-AB on child health in the states of the Brazilian Northeast. It is a cross-sectional study conducted with secondary data based on interviews with 5,116 users of 4,190 Family Health Teams in the nine states of the Northeast macroregion. Fourteen questions on the medical monitoring of children from 0 to 2 years old were evaluated. Proportions and 95% confidence intervals were calculated for each Unit of the Federation of the Brazilian Northeast. The indicators with the highest proportions were the Guthrie PKU test performed within seven days of life (84.4%), children always accompanied by the same professionals (79.1%), monitoring expected growth and development for age (84.9%), dietary guidance (86.3%) and up-to-date vaccination (95.3%). The indicators with the lowest proportions were guidance on the best position for the child to sleep in (45.7%) and whether or not the child's health handbook (46.9%) was received. In all indicators, there were significant differences between the states analyzed. There are differences in the quality of child health care on offer according to the evaluation of users participating in the PMAQ-AB between states in the Northeast.
34076118 The scope of this article is to evaluate the structure and work processes of Family Health Strategy teams related to the nutritional care of children. It involved an assessment survey of 136 health teams in 45 municipalities in the State of Paraíba. The data on structure (availability of anthropometric equipment, supplements and technical documents) and processes (management, intersectoriality and activities of the Brazilian Breastfeeding and Feeding Strategy) were summarized in scores and classified as incipient, intermediate or advanced. Analyses were performed according to contextual characteristics of the municipality (population size and human development) and the health team (whether from the Programa Mais Médicos or conventional teams, and whether accompanied by a nutritionist or not). Nutritional care was classified at the intermediate level, with the availability of technical documents, the use of SISVAN or the e-SUS and the implementation of the Brazilian Breastfeeding and Feeding Strategy being the most deficient items. Large municipalities and expanded health teams with nutritionists had better structure and process conditions, respectively. The fragmented implementation of nutritional care calls for improvements in structure and processes for due fitness for purpose.
34076119 The elderly population is vulnerable to the risks of the use of medications, especially those considered potentially inappropriate medications (PIMs), in which the risks outweigh the benefits. The study sought to evaluate the PIMs prescribed in Primary Health Care (PHC) and associated factors. A cross-sectional, analytical study was carried out from March to December 2019 in PHC in Campina Grande, Paraíba, through interviews with 458 elderly individuals. The independent variables included socioeconomic characteristics, health status and the use of medications, and the outcome was classified as PIM by the Brazilian Consensus on Potentially Inappropriate Medications. There was a prescription of at least one PIM for 44.8% of the elderly and the majority affecting the Central Nervous System (54.4%). In the adjusted model, depression (PR=2.01; 95%CI 1.59-2.55), using other medications in addition to those prescribed (PR=1.36; 95%CI 1.08-1.72) and polypharmacy (PR=1.80; 95%CI 1.40-2.33) remained an associated factor, and self-reporting systemic arterial hypertension became a protective factor (PR=0.65; 95%CI 0.49-0.87). This reveals the need for actions to monitor closely the use of PIMs by the elderly to ensure access in conjunction with safety.
34076120 This study aimed to identify the structuring elements guiding the establishment of the social representations of diabetic foot among people with diabetes mellitus. This qualitative study is based on the Social Representations Theory and was conducted in a capital of the Brazilian Northeast. The free word association test and a roadmap were used to characterize the sociodemographic and clinical profile to collect data. The analysis was performed using openEVOC software. The constituent elements of the diabetic foot's social representation 'cure' and 'really bad', revealing that living with a diabetic foot is challenging, but there is hope for a cure, which is a driving force in the daily search for care. The 'prevention' element emerged in the representational field, denoting a more critical view and a capacity to transform the identified core elements. We found that the representational structure is based on subjective, valuating, and attitudinal contents. This knowledge can contribute to the design of interventions in the provision of care and diabetic foot screening in PHC services.
34076121 This study aimed to describe the prevalence of leprosy and verify the factors associated with multibacillary clinical types in a Family Health Strategy priority setting to control and monitor the disease in northeastern Brazil. This cross-sectional study used data from the Notifiable Diseases Information System related to leprosy cases notified in Imperatriz, Maranhão, between 2008 and 2017. The prevalence was determined yearly and for the period. Poisson regression models with a significance level of 5% were employed to associate the variables and the multibacillary clinical types. Most of the 2,476 leprosy cases analyzed referred to multibacillary clinical types. The prevalence ranged from 7.8 and 15.6/10,000 inhabitants, with high and very high endemicity levels. The variables male, age groups between 30 and 59 years and ≥60 years, schooling <8 years, level 2 physical disability, types 1 and 2 reactive episodes, and urban residence area showed significant associations (p≤0.05) with multibacillary clinical types. Such findings can serve as a basis for elaborating and implementing leprosy control and surveillance measures, gearing actions to the most vulnerable groups, and becoming more effective.
34076122 In this interview, public health physician Antônio Carlile Holanda Lavor with 57-year career and long and broad experience in the Brazilian Unified Health System (SUS) management, especially in primary health care, talks about his management at the head of the Oswaldo Cruz Foundation unit in Ceará (Fiocruz-CE), from 2008 to the present moment. Known internationally for institutionalizing the Health Worker Program in Ceará in 1987, he discusses the process of implementing Fiocruz-CE and the role of research in guiding the work of the Family Health Strategy during the COVID-19 pandemic.
34076123 The objective was to ve rify the association between sexual maturation and physical activity during adolescence. A systematic review of articles published between 2008 and 2018 was conducted using the following databases: PubMed/Medline, SciELO, Web of Science, Scopus, Lilacs, and BVS Adolec Brasil. The following descriptors and keywords were used in English and Portuguese: adolescent, sexual maturation, survey, questionnaire, and physical activity. The literature search retrieved 806 articles. Twelve articles were included after applying the selection criteria. Level of physical activity was highest in the initial stage of sexual maturation. Levels of physical activity appear to decrease with advancing sexual maturation status. There is no consensus about the association between sexual maturation and physical activity levels among adolescents within the literature reviewed by this study. Further research is needed to investigate whether this relationship exists and professionals involved in healthcare for adolescents should take effective steps to combat physical inactivity.
34076125 The text presents and discusses the main aspects related to the current dynamics of the vaccine industry in the world and in Brazil, focusing on the demand created by the pandemic of COVID-19. At the global level, it briefly exposes the place currently occupied by Brazil within the scope of the BRICS and sets out and analyzes the options - identities and differences - of industrial policy in Brazil, China and India in the field of vaccines. Next, it analyzes the displacement of the vaccine industry, from a situation of exclusive production of immunizers to a majority control by the large pharmaceutical industry. Further on, it recovers recent fundamental aspects of the vaccine industry in Brazil, with an emphasis on Biomanguinhos / Fiocruz and the Butantan Institute. Finally, it discusses the successes and limitations of the technology transfer mechanism used by the two institutions, as well as the relevance of their historically assumed commitment to public health policies.
34076126 This essay reflects on sexual practices and prevention in the contexts of the AIDS and COVID-19 pandemics. It analyses data collected between July and October 2020 through participant observation, as part of an ethnographic research project on HIV vulnerability and prevention among men who have sex with men in the Metropolitan Region of Recife, state of Pernambuco (PE), Brazil. The results point to the relevance of physical appearance and the affective bond between partners in engendering emotions that mediate coping with the risk of infection during both pandemics. It indicates the need to incorporate those communicational dimensions into informational materials to make them more effective.
34076127 This study sought to assess the adherence to preventive measures among the elderly more prone to severe forms of COVID-19, and the association and interaction with social support. It is a cross-sectional study conducted with a sample of 3,477 participants of the telephone survey of the Brazilian Longitudinal Study of Aging (ELSI-COVID-19 initiative), who reported going out of the home in the past week. The adherence was based on the frequency of leaving the house, the need to venture outside the home, use of masks, and sanitization of hands. Statistical analysis was based on the Poisson model with robust variance. Predisposing factors for severe forms of COVID-19 included age ≥65 years, hypertension, diabetes, and obesity. Social support included living arrangements and social distancing during the pandemic. Approximately 46% of the participants showed higher adherence, which was positively associated with the number of predisposing factors for severe forms of COVID-19. Social support was not associated with adherence, nor was this association modified after adjustments. The conclusion drawn is that higher adherence is concentrated among the elderly with greater predisposition to severe forms of COVID-19, irrespective of social support, albeit preventive measures should be adopted by all.
34076129 This article explores the use of spatial artificial intelligence to estimate the resources needed to implement Brazil's COVID-19 immu nization campaign. Using secondary data, we conducted a cross-sectional ecological study adop ting a time-series design. The unit of analysis was Brazil's primary care centers (PCCs). A four-step analysis was performed to estimate the popula tion in PCC catchment areas using artificial in telligence algorithms and satellite imagery. We also assessed internet access in each PCC and con ducted a space-time cluster analysis of trends in cases of SARS linked to COVID-19 at municipal level. Around 18% of Brazil's elderly population live more than 4 kilometer from a vaccination point. A total of 4,790 municipalities showed an upward trend in SARS cases. The number of PCCs located more than 5 kilometer from cell towers was largest in the North and Northeast regions. Innovative stra tegies are needed to address the challenges posed by the implementation of the country's National COVID-19 Vaccination Plan. The use of spatial artificial intelligence-based methodologies can help improve the country's COVID-19 response.
34076131 This article discusses health problems due to firearm injuries suffered on duty military police officers in the metropolitan region of Rio de Janeiro (RJ). Medical records analysis was con ducted referring to military police officers who were treated at the Military Police's Central Hos pital (MPCH) due to gunshot wounds from June 2015 to December 2017 according to professional profile, the characteristics of the event and the le sion, the spatial distribution of the incidents in volving gunshot wounds, and the healthcare units involved in their care. Firearms injured four hun dred seventy-five military police officers: 98.3% were male, 77.3% were in service, 97.9% were soldier personnel. As to the anatomical location of the wounds, the most affected regions were: lower (41.1%) and superior (33.1%) limbs, the head neck-face region (23.5%), and thorax-abdomen (3%). The areas in the metropolitan area of Rio de Janeiro with the highest occurrence of firearm morbidity are program areas 3 and 1 and the Baixada Fluminense. There is a correlation between police morbidity rates due to firearm injuries in the municipalities of the metropolitan region and demographic density (p = 0.024).
34076133 To analyze the network of correlations between the realms of the Effor t-Reward Imbalance (ERI) model, resilience, and quality of life among military police officers. This is a cross-sectional study conducted with 258 police officers from the Special Opera tions Battalion of the Military Police in a city in Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil. The scales of the ERI model, resilience, and World Health Quality of Life (WHOQOL-bref) assessed psychosocial stress, resilience, and quality of life. Descriptive and analytical statistics were performed em ploying the network analysis. The realms of the ERI model and resilience correlated with all the WHOQOL's realms (p<0.001). The network model showed a negative association between effort, overcommitment, and physical and environmental realms. The environmental realm was positively associated with reward, while resilience was positively associated with the general, physical, and psychological realms. We concluded that psychosocial stress interferes in the quality of life of military police officers, and resi lience may work as a protective factor.
34076134 The aim of this article is to assess the association between body image dissatisfaction and sociodemographic and health behaviors, according to sex. Data were analyzed for 6,289 women and 5,188 men (35-59 years), participants in the baseline of the Longitudinal Study of Adult Health (ELSA-Brasil), using multinomial regression. The odds of dissatisfaction due to feeling underweight were higher among in women with low schooling and those who only consumed fruit weekly. Moderate physical activity reduced this type of dissatisfaction by 50%. Higher odds of dissatisfaction due to overweight were seen in married women, those who practiced light physical activity, and former smokers. Men with secondary schooling and excessive alcohol consumption showed 50% higher odds of dissatisfaction due to underweight, while light or moderate physical activity increased the odds by 75% and 94%, respectively. Among men, light and moderate physical activity were also associated with increased odds of dissatisfaction due to overweight. These findings corroborate that unhealthy habits and behaviors can influence body image dissatisfaction with different patterns between women and men.
34076135 This article aims to investigate the relationship between intimate partner physical violence (IPPV) and breastfeeding (BF), use of breastmilk substitutes (BMS) and bottle-feeding among children aged 12 to 15 months. This is a cross-sectional study with mothers in primary care facilities of the city of Rio de Janeiro. IPPV was identified by the Brazilian version of the Conflict Tactics Scales 1-Form R and feeding practices were identified by a 24-hour Dietary Recall. Associations were verified by logistic regression with odds ratio (OR) estimates and 95% confidence intervals. BF was offered to 58.5% of the children and BMS to 88.5%. Also, 70.5% of the children used a baby bottle. Physical violence was observed in 26.7% of couples. Households where couples physically abuse each other are more likely to not breastfeed (OR=2.14, p-value=0.030), to use breastmilk substitutes (OR=5.15, p-value=0.03) and bottle-feed (OR=2.71; p-value=0.01), when compared to households without physical violence. The results highlight the need to investigate intrafamily relationships in cases where inadequate breastfeeding practices are identified, and to enable health professionals to support families in conflict situations.
34076136 The scope of this study is to describe the food environment of a medium-sized municipality in southern Brazil and compare the availability of different types of food outlets in neighborhood socioeconomic and demographic environments. An ecological study was carried out in 45 buffers of 400m in São Leopoldo county, RS. The buffer was calculated from the center point of the residences of women participating in a larger research project. All streets were surveyed to identify food stores and record their geographical coordinates, as well as apply the NEMS questionnaire on the availability, price and quality of 108 items. The commercial outlets were classified as supermarkets, grocery stores, fruit stores and convenience stores. Supermarkets and grocery stores were present in higher quantity in lower income buffers and grocery stores were more prevalent in those with higher population tertiles. Another result was a direct relationship between NEMS and tertile income scores for supermarkets, grocery stores and fruit stores, and an indirect relationship for the same stores and population tertile. The availability of healthy food was higher in areas with higher income and lower numbers of inhabitants, indicating the need for better distribution of food stores and availability of varieties of food in the municipality.
34076137 The objectives of the study were to assess the prevalence of self-reported visual impairment among undergraduate students between 18 and 39 years of age at the Federal University of Pelotas, and to validate a question about visual impairment in a subsample of the participants. A cross-sectional study was conducted by asking the question 'Do you have any difficulty seeing up close and/or in the distance?' As the gold standard for the validation study, visual acuity (VA) was measured using the Snellen chart. Patients with VA less than 20/40 in either eye were considered to have reduced VA. The prevalence of self-reported visual impairment was 37.3% (95% CI: 35.1-39.6) and VA less than 20/40 in either eye was 6.9% (95% CI: 5.3-8.9). The question revealed sensitivity of 71.4% (95 CI: 57.8-82.7), specificity of 66.9% (95% CI: 63.4-70.2), positive predictive value of 13.8% (95% CI: 10.0-18.3), and negative predictive value of 96.9% (95% CI: 95,1-98.2). The results indicated a high prevalence of self-reported visual impairment among university students. The question showed reasonable sensitivity and specificity and high negative predictive value and may be used for screening for ophthalmological evaluation among young adult university students.
34076154 To identify the predictive capacity for mortality of the indexes Revised Trauma Score, Rapid Emergency Medicine Score, modified Rapid Emergency Medicine Score, and Simplified Acute Physiology Score III in blunt trauma victims hospitalized in an intensive care unit and compare their performance. Retrospective cohort of patients with blunt trauma in an intensive care unit from medical records. Receiver Operating Characteristic and a 95% confidence interval of the area under the curve were analyzed to compare results. Out of 165 analyzed patients, 66.7% have received surgical treatment. The mortality in the intensive care unit and in the hospital was 17.6% and 20.6%, respectively. For the mortality in the intensive care unit, the area under the curve varied from 0.672 to 0.738; however, better results have been observed in surgical patients (0.747 to 0.811). Similar results have been observed for in-hospital mortality. In all analyses, the areas under the curve of the indexes presented no significant difference. The accuracy of the severity indexes was moderate, with an improved performance when applied to surgical patients. The four indexes presented a similar prediction for the analyzed outcomes.
34076179 To compare the effect of non-nutritive sucking, 25% oral glucose and 25% oral glucose combined with non-nutritive sucking in pain relief in premature infants submitted to heel puncture for blood glucose monitoring. This is a randomized crossover clinical trial with 34 preterm infants who randomly received interventions: non-nutritive sucking, 25% oral glucose and the two interventions combined for three consecutive days in heel puncture for blood glucose monitoring. Assessment by the Premature Infant Pain Profile for 30 seconds before the intervention, called the baseline period and for 5 minutes after puncture. The combination of interventions made the premature infants return to baseline, with 1 minute and 30 seconds after heel puncture, promoting a 2.2% percentage reduction in the scale. Comparing the effect of isolated and combined interventions showed that, when offered in combination, preterm infants were able to return to baseline parameters more quickly. Brazilian Clinical Trials Registry: RBR-3gm6w5.
34076180 To analyze fake news about immunobiologicals using as reference vaccine hesitancy in the World Health Organization's 3Cs model (confidence, complacency and convenience). This is an exploratory qualitative research that used content analysis to analyze fake news on three national news-checking sites. Twenty fake news related to immunobiologicals were analyzed, with 55% published in 2018 and 63% related to yellow fever vaccine. From analysis of results, two empirical categories have emerged: Immunobiologicals have a potential risk of death/sequel; Immunobiologicals are ineffective. Fake news have the potential to produce vaccine hesitancy based on the 3Cs model. Therefore, it is necessary to rethink communicative health practices that do not underestimate the asymmetries and inequities that characterize the unequal Brazilian society. Considering that nursing is the largest workforce in immunization rooms, there is a need for professionals' engagement as an active vehicle of truthful information in immunobiologicals for the population.
34076209 To investigate factors associated with the notification of noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL), on the Notifiable Health Conditions Information System (SINAN) in Brazil. This was an ecological study to estimate the proportion of municipalities that had notified NIHL. Logistic regression models were used to identify associated factors. Between 2013-2015, 277 (5.0%) municipalities notified NIHL. Notification was more prevalent among municipalities in an Occupational Health Referral Center (CEREST) coverage area (OR=1.62 - 95%CI 1.02;2.59) or those that had a CEREST in their territory (OR=4.37 - 95CI% 2.75;6.93), those that were closer to the state capital (OR=1.43 - 95%CI 1.06;1.92) and those with a high human development index (OR=2.35 - 95%CI 1.16;4.75). Among the municipalities located in a CEREST coverage area, notification was more frequent when there was a speech-language-hearing professional in the team (OR=1.96 - 95%CI - 1.47;2.63) and when employee turnover was low (OR=1.88 - 95%CI 1.40;2.52). Contextual factors influence NIHL notification, particularly the presence of CERESTs and their qualification.
34076227 To analyze polypharmacy prevalence and associated factors in older adults living in Rio Branco, Acre, Brazil, in 2014. This was a cross-sectional population-based study using complex sampling with older adults. Polypharmacy was defined as concomitant use of five or more medications. Polypharmacy prevalence was 14.9% (95%CI 11.8;18.6), positively associated with females (OR=2.29 - 95%CI 1.41;3.74), white race/skin color (OR=1.61 - 95%CI 1.10;2.38), dependence (OR=1.65 - 95%CI 1.05;2.60), change in eating habits/dieting (OR=1.66 - 95%CI 1.16;2.36), hospitalization in the last 12 months (OR=1.61 - 95%CI 1.02;2.53) and presence of the following self-reported morbidities: systemic arterial hypertension (OR=2.40 - 95%CI 1.33;4.34), diabetes mellitus (OR=2.17 - 95%CI 1.23;3.84), osteoporosis (OR=2.92 - 95%CI 1.84;4.64) and heart problems (OR=2.94 - 95%CI 1.90;4.56). This study found that polypharmacy in the older adults was associated with demographic and health conditions.
34076228 To analyze aspects related to schistosomiasis positivity in an area of low prevalence in Brazil. This was a cross-sectional study, carried out in the first half of 2020, where we analyzed the proportion of positivity, according to the number of Kato-Katz slides, the diagnostic performance of the test and positivity estimates based on data from the Schistosomiasis Surveillance and Control Program Information System (SISPCE). 2,088 slides from 348 individuals were analyzed, with proportion of positivity of 11.8%, 26.7% and 31.0% for 1, 4 and 6 slides analyzed, respectively. There was excellent agreement (Kappa = 0.91) between the readings of 4 and 6 slides. The SISPCE data was estimated to be underreported by up to 2.1 times. Increasing the number of slides increased Kato-Katz positivity, which can contribute to maximizing the control of the disease as a Public Health problem.
34076229 To analyze prevalence and factors associated with intimate partner violence during pregnancy. This was a cross-sectional study, with data obtained through interviews conducted with pregnant women aged 10 to 49 years during the third trimester of pregnancy, living in Caxias, state of Maranhão, Brazil (2019-2020). The instrument of the World Health Organization Violence Against Women Study was used to identify violence. A hierarchical analysis was performed using multiple logistic regression. 233 pregnant women were interviewed. The prevalence of violence during pregnancy was 33.0%, with predominance of psychological violence (18.9%). In the final hierarchical model, women aged <20 years old (ORadj=2.09 - 95%CI 1.17;3.54) and illicit drug use by intimate partner (ORadj=8.78 - 95%CI 2.13;28.92) remained as factors associated with the outcome. Prevalence of violence during pregnancy was high, with illegal drug use by young women and their partners being factors associated with its occurrence.
34077986 To study a sample of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients for their gynecological/obstetric history and compare them to controls to determine their influences on number of pregnancies, menarche, menopause and reproductive years following RA onset.  This is a cross-sectional study of 122 RA patients and 126 controls. Patients and controls were questioned about age of menarche, age of menopause, number of pregnancies and abortions. Reproductive years were calculated as the difference between age at menopause and age at menarche. For comparison, we used the Mann-Whitney, unpaired <i>t</i>, chi-squared, and Spearman tests. The adopted significance was 5%.  In the RA patients with disease beginning in the postmenopausal years, the period of reproductive years (age at menopause - age of menarche) showed a positive correlation with age at disease onset (rho = 0.46; 95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.20-0.55 with <i>p</i> = 0.0008). The number of pregnancies was higher in patients with postmenopausal disease onset when compared with those with premenopausal disease onset (median of 3 with interquartile range [IQR] = 2-4 versus median of 2 with IQR = 1-3; <i>p</i> = 0.009), and RA patients had more pregnancies than controls (<i>p</i> = 0.0002).  The present study shows that, in our population, the duration of reproductive years and the number of pregnancies are linked to the onset of RA.
34077987 Most prenatal screening programs for toxoplasmosis use immunoassays in serum samples of pregnant women. Few studies assess the accuracy of screening tests in dried blood spots, which are of easy collection, storage, and transportation. The goals of the present study are to determine the performance and evaluate the agreement between an immunoassay of dried blood spots and a reference test in the serum of pregnant women from a population-based prenatal screening program for toxoplasmosis in Brazil.  A cross-sectional study was performed to compare the immunoassays Imunoscreen Toxoplasmose IgM and Imunoscreen Toxoplasmose IgG (Mbiolog Diagnósticos, Ltda., Contagem, Minas Gerais, Brazil)in dried blood spots with the enzyme-linked fluorescent assay (ELFA, BioMérieux S.A., Lyon, France) reference standard in the serum of pregnant women from Minas Gerais Congenital Toxoplasmosis Control Program.  The dried blood spot test was able to discriminate positive and negative results of pregnant women when compared with the reference test, with an accuracy of 98.2% for immunoglobulin G (IgG), and of 95.8% for immunoglobulin M (IgM).  Dried blood samples are easy to collect, store, and transport, and they have a good performance, making this a promising method for prenatal toxoplasmosis screening programs in countries with continental dimensions, limited resources, and a high prevalence of toxoplasmosis, as is the case of Brazil.
34077988 To evaluate the antitumoral role of γδ T<sub>DC</sub> cells and αβ T<sub>DC</sub> cells in an experimental model of breast cancer.  Thirty female Balb/c mice were divided into 2 groups: control group (<i>n</i> = 15) and induced-4T1 group (<i>n</i> = 15), in which the mice received 2 × 10<sup>5</sup> 4T1 mammary tumor cell line. Following the 28-day experimental period, immune cells were collected from the spleen and analyzed by flow cytometry for comparison of αβ T<sub>DC</sub> (TCRαβ<sup>+</sup> CD11c<sup>+</sup>MHCII<sup>+</sup>) and γδ T<sub>DC</sub> (TCRγδ<sup>+</sup>CD11c<sup>+</sup>MHCII<sup>+</sup>) cells regarding surface markers (CD4<sup>+</sup> and C8<sup>+</sup>) and cytokines (IFN-γ, TNF-α, IL-12 and IL-17).  A total of 26.53% of γδ T<sub>DC</sub> - control group (<i>p</i> < 0.0001) - the proportion of αβ T<sub>DC</sub> was lower in splenic cells than γδ T<sub>DC</sub>; however, these 2 cell types were reduced in tumor conditions (<i>p</i> < 0.0001), and the proportion of IFN-γ, TNF-α, IL-12 and IL-17 cytokines produced by γδ T<sub>DC</sub> was higher than those produced by αβ T<sub>DC</sub>, but it decreased under conditions of tumor-related immune system response (<i>p</i> < 0.0001).  Healthy mice engrafted with malignant cells 4T1 breast tumor presented T<sub>DC</sub> with γδ TCR repertoire. These cells express cytotoxic molecules of lymphocytes T, producing anti-tumor proinflammatory cytokines.
34077989 To evaluate serum levels of adiponectin in pregnant adolescents between 30 and 36 weeks of gestation.  A prospective cross-sectional study enrolled 67 normal pregnant women between 30 and 36 weeks of gestation and eutrophic (body mass index [BMI]: 18.5-25 kg/m<sup>2</sup>), of which 36 were adolescents (< 20 years old) and 31 adults (≥ 20 years old). Serum adiponectin levels were determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The <i>t-</i>student or Mann-Whitney tests were used for intergroup comparison.  Pregnant adolescents showed significantly higher serum adiponectin concentrations compared with pregnant adults (<i>p</i> = 0.04). No differences were observed in adiponectin levels in younger pregnant adolescents (< 16 years old) compared with older pregnant adolescents (≥ 16 years old). Adiponectin values were divided into 3 subgroups: < 3,000 ng/mL, between 3,000 and 5,000 ng/mL, and > 5,000 ng/mL. Birthweight was significantly higher in women > 5,000 ng/mL when compared with < 3,000 ng/mL in the adolescent group. No association between pregestational adiponectin levels and BMI, gestational weight gain, and gestational age was observed; however, there was a positive relation with birthweight (<i>p</i> = 0.0239).  Serum adiponectin values in pregnant adolescents between 30 and 36 weeks of gestation were higher compared with pregnant adults; however, no differences between younger and older pregnant adolescents were observed.
34077990 In a healthy athlete, the caloric intake is sufficient for sports energy needs and body physiological functions, allowing a balance between energy availability, bone metabolism, and menstrual cycle. On the other hand, an imbalance caused by low energy availability due to a restrictive diet, eating disorders or long periods of energy expenditure leads to multisystemic deregulation favoring the essential functions of the body. This phenomenon, described as the female athlete triad, occurs in a considerable percentage of high-performance athletes, with harmful consequences for their future. The present review was carried out based on a critical analysis of the most recent publications available and aims to provide a global perception of the topic relative energy deficit in sport (RED-S). The objective is to promote the acquisition of more consolidated knowledge on an undervalued theme, enabling the acquisition of preventive strategies, early diagnosis and/or appropriate treatment.
34077991 Placental pathophysiology in SARS-CoV-2 infection can help researchers understand more about the infection and its impact on the maternal/neonatal outcomes. This brief review provides an overview about some aspects of the placental pathology in SARS-CoV-2 infection. In total, 11 papers were included. The current literature suggests that there are no specific histopathological characteristics in the placenta related to SARS-CoV-2 infection, but placentas from infected women are more likely to show findings of maternal and/or fetal malperfusion. The most common findings in placentas from infected women were fibrin deposition and intense recruitment of inflammatory infiltrates. The transplacental transmission of this virus is unlikely to occur, probably due to low expression of the receptor for SARS-CoV-2 in placental cell types. Further studies are needed to improve our knowledge about the interaction between the virus and the mother-fetus dyad and the impact on maternal and neonatal/fetal outcomes.
