27764856	Salivary gland surgery is a common procedure in otorhinolaryngology. Parotidectomy and submandibulectomy represent the treatment of choice in benign and malignant tumors of the salivary glands. However, as to this point there are no guidelines are concerning diagnostic and therapeutic approaches of benign and malignant tumors of the salivary gland. Since the introduction of sialendoscopy there are new diagnostic and therapeutic procedures available in treating obstructive sialadenitis. The present article provides an overview of anatomical principles, diagnostic approaches and the most important salivary gland surgeries for future otorhinolaryngologists under specialist training.
27780279	Legal expert opinions are a crucial instrument of professional self-control in medicine. To give impulses for further development, focus groups were initiated to reflect upon the perspective of legal dental experts. 5 focus group discussions on the topic 'Professionalization of legal dental experts' were conducted. A total of 32 experienced legal dental experts participated in the discussions. The results were evaluated by qualitative content analysis. A catalogue of 68 ideas was generated for improvement and divided into 15 categories. Among these were periodic quality circles, interprofessional exchange, supervision of novices and periodic feedback for legal dental experts and dentists. Self-reflection can be included as an instrument for quality improvement of legal dental expert opinions.
27780280	Quality management (QM) became mandatory for the ambulatory sector of the German health care system 10 years ago. The aim of this study was to find out how general practitioners (GPs) perceived the introduction of this measure, how they see it today and what they expect of the future concerning QM. In a qualitative study, interviews following a semi-structured guideline with GPs were conducted. Following transcription, interviews were coded in triangulation, first inductively, then deductively until saturation was reached. Main topics and code families were agreed on after discussion. There was consensus on the necessity of standardization of basic processes like hygiene. However, the application of QM to an activity that emphasizes personal relationships and communication was seen as barely possible. GPs stated that they reduced QM to a tolerable and for them reasonable minimum. GPs mostly refused certification. The next 10 years were seen with pessimism in terms of more bureaucratic guidelines. The statutory introduction of QM was an attack on medical professionalism. Instead of passive resistance and reduction of QM to a minimum, engaged independent quality work might help to regain the trust of society we seem to have lost and restore the professional autonomy we need for our work.
30041262	In Germany, 10,000 cases of spontaneous pneumothorax are treated inpatient every year. The German Society for Thoracic Surgery (DGT), in co-operation with the German Society for Pulmonology (DGP), the German Radiological Society (DRG) and the German Society of Internal Medicine (DGIM) has developed an S3 guideline on spontaneous pneumothorax and postinterventional pneumothorax moderated by the German Association of Scientific Medical Societies (AWMF). Based on the source guideline of the British Thoracic Society (BTS2010) for spontaneous pneumothorax, a literature search on spontaneous pneumothorax was carried out from 2008 onwards, for post-interventional pneumothorax from 1960 onwards. Evidence levels according to the Oxford Center for Evidence-Based Medicine (2011) were assigned to the relevant studies found. Recommendations according to GRADE (A: 'we recommend'/'we do not recommend', B: 'we suggest'/'we do not suggest') were determined in three consensus conferences by the nominal group process. The algorithms for primary and secondary pneumothorax differ in the indication for CT scan as well as in the indication for chest drainage application and video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS). Indication for surgery is recommended individually taking into account the risk of recurrence, life circumstances, patient preferences and procedure risks. For some forms of secondary pneumothorax, a reserved indication for surgery is recommended. Therapy of postinterventional spontaneous pneumothorax is similar to that of primary spontaneous pneumothorax. The recommendations of the S3 Guideline provide assistance in managing spontaneous pneumothorax and post-interventional pneumothorax. Whether this will affect existing deviant diagnostic and therapeutic measures will be demonstrated by future epidemiological studies.
30043699	CME: Jet Lag Jetlag Abstract. Crossing several time zones by air travel leads to a temporary desynchronization of the internal clock with the external light/dark cycle. In the following jet lag occurs typically including difficulties falling asleep or waking up early as well as day-time sleepiness and significant reduction of wellbeing and fitness. To provide optimal medical advice, it is necessary to understand the human circadian rhythm and sleep-wake regulation. In consideration with additional information on travel plans, an approach to alleviate jet lag symptoms can be developed. This article addresses different supportive measures and advice on how to adjust to a new time zone and reduce jet lag symptoms.
30043700	We report the case of a 29-year-old patient who presented in the emergency room with severe abdominal pain. After initially inconspicuous medical history and laboratory evaluation, repeated focused history taking led to the correct diagnosis: a paintball projectile had left its mark. The patient had suffered a third-degree rupture of the spleen with delayed manifestation two weeks after the trauma. He could be successfully managed with an organ-preserving non-operative approach.
30043702	Modern Management of Pituitary Adenomas - Current State of Diagnosis, Treatment and Follow-Up Abstract. Pituitary adenomas (PA) are benign neoplasms originating from parenchymal cells of the anterior pituitary. Tumor mass effect can cause headaches, visual deficits by compression of the optic chiasm, and partial or complete hypopituitarism. Hormone secreting PA can cause several forms of specific syndromes such as Cushing's disease or acromegaly depending on the type of hormone. Endoscopic transsphenoidal resection is the preferred treatment option for most symptomatic or growing PA. Nowadays techniques like high definition intraoperative MRI can assist the surgeon in his goal of maximal safe resection. An exception are prolactinomas which can usually be treated medically with dopamine agonists. Therapy of PA is complex and should be managed in a high-volume center with an interdisciplinary team approach including neurosurgeons and endocrinologists.
30043704	The Influence of Protein on the Prevention of Fragility Fractures Among Senior Adults Abstract. The aim of this review article is to discuss protein intake in senior adults at risk for fragility fractures as a modifiable factor for fracture prevention. Proteins are building blocks of the bone matrix and the muscles. This dual function fits in with the concept of prevention of fragility fractures in senior adults aimed at reducing both bone loss and falls. In older adults, a protein-rich diet could be another simple and effective way to promote bone and muscle health, in addition to the established recommendations for adequate vitamin D and calcium intake.
30043707	Perspectives for the Electroencephalogram in Psychiatry Abstract. The electroencephalogram (EEG) is a non-invasive and cost-effective method to monitor spontaneous neuronal activity over time. Pathologies in EEG recordings indicate with high sensitivity but low specificity abnormal functional brain states. The main psychiatric indications for EEG recordings include atypical clinical symptoms of a neuropsychiatric syndrome or atypical reactions to medication as well as a baseline diagnostic before starting treatment with specific drugs or stimulation modalities. In recent research the EEG continues to be a valuable tool not only in diagnostics but also for the prediction of treatment success. The following paper focuses on basic electrophysiological understanding of EEG recordings, the diagnostic value of EEG recordings in different clinical entities, and new research attempts in diagnostic and treatment prediction.
30045365	In open wedge osteotomies of the distal radius, bone grafts increase initial stability and enhance bone formation but are frequently associated with complaints and complications at the donor site. Previous studies have suggested that bone grafting may probably be unnecessary. Between 2013 and 2016, 19 patients with symptomatic extra-articular fractures of the distal radius, malunited in extension, underwent corrective osteotomy using a palmar locking implant without an additional bone graft. 3 patients dropped out for implant related problems. One patient refused the follow-up investigation. 12 patients (7 male / 5 female) showed complete remodeling of the defect at 5.5 ± 3.5 (1.5-13) months. Palmar tilt improved significantly, from a mean of 17° to -1°, the DASH score from 41 ± 26 (7-94) points to 26 ± 25 (0-75). Radial inclination and ulnar variance and pain level showed only slight, non-significant improvement. Final range of motion and grip strength did not improve. In the modified Mayo wrist score, 5 excellent, 1 good, 3 fair and 3 unfavourable results were obtained. Three female patients showed no remodeling at 10 ± 3 (6-12) months. In the modified Mayo wrist score, 1 fair and two unfavourable results were obtained. One of these patients underwent reoperation with iliac crest bone grafting. Though remodeling of the distal radius only failed in female patients, no statistically significant dependence of bony healing on gender, age at the date surgery or size of the defect was found. In the healed group there was no statistical correlation between the interval from surgery to bony fusion and gender, age at the date of surgery or width of the osteotomy gap dorsally. A correlation was found between the widths of the osteotomy gap palmarly and the interval to bony fusion. After open wedge osteotomy of the distal radius, remodeling may occur without filling the defect by a bone graft. Since bony healing is not predictable and may require more than 12 months in single cases, we will continue bone grafting in our own practice.
30045366	Because of its form, size and position, the scaphoid is known to be the foundation stone of the carpus, with an exceptionally important biomechanical function. Therefore evaluation of fracture morphology is essential. Experts already agree that computed tomography (CT scan) in the long axis of the scaphoid is the best approach for diagnosing scaphoid fractures, but also for therapy planning. But this method is hardly a standard in most hospitals and studies showing superiority of this technique for therapy planning are non-existent. The purpose of this retrospective study was to test if the interobserver reliability for the evaluation of scaphoid fracture morphology in CT scans in the long axis of the scaphoid is greater than in CT scans in the plane of the wrist, and thus more reliable. 42 patients with scaphoid fractures had a CT scan in the long axis of the scaphoid (CT-scaphoid). CT reformations along planes relative to the wrist (CT -wrist) were made. Those 84 cases were anonymised and put in a random order. They were presented to 4 clinical observers (2 hand surgeons and 2 radiologists) for fracture evaluation with respect to: localisation, humpback deformity, offset (radial/ulnar and palmar/dorsal) and classification by Herbert. Surgeons have to select a palmar or dorsal approach as well as an open or percutaneous technique. Statistical analysis was made between 2 and 4 observers by an impartial statistician, using Cohen's kappa coefficient, Pearson coefficient, Fleiss' kappa, interclass correlation coefficient (Shrout and Fleiss) and Spearman rho coefficient. In all evaluated parameters, the interobserver reliabilty was higher in the CT scan in the long axis of the scaphoid, although statistical significance was only found for the humpback deformity. For evaluation and understanding scaphoid fractures, the CT scan along the long axis of the scaphoid is more significant and reliable than the scan in the plane of the wrist and is therefore preferable.
30045367	Due to the functional coupling of adjacent finger joints and the quadriga effect of the flexor digitorum profundus an influence of the grip pattern of the hand after fusion of a distal interphalangeal joint (DIPJ) is assumed. Two patients with DIPJ II- fusion and 8 patients with DIPJ III- fusion due to a posttraumatic osteoarthritis, but without any other pathology of both hands were assessed on average 55 (17-121) months postoperatively by manugraphy. Using three sizes of cylinders the total grip force and the load distribution of the hand and each finger were measured. The grip pattern was analyzed by 2D-graphs. The results of the affected hand were compared to the healthy opposite side. The consolidation of the DIPJ arthrodesis was confirmed and the angle of the joint fusion measured by radiographs. Patients rated their pain in rest or under strain by a visual analogue scale. The total grip force of the affected hand compared to the opposite side was 93 % for the small cylinder, 97 % for the middle, and 96 % for the large cylinder. Both patients with a DIPJ II- fusion neglected the index finger considerably and had a remarkably weak grip force (68/62/68 % for the 3 cylinders respectively). The grip pattern of all fingers has changed. Eight patients with DIPJ III- fusion averaged 99/106/103 % grip force. In six of them, the affected hand was stronger than the opposite hand when using the middle cylinder. The finger force of the middle and ring finger was reduced, but of the index and little finger increased. Five patients had a striking peak of local pressure at the fused DIPJ III.The angle of the fused DIPJ averaged 6° (0-21°) for all patients. Pain was rated on average 1.4 (0-5) at rest and 2 (0-8) with strain. Both aspects were not found to influence the grip force or the load distribution. After DIPJ- fusion of the middle finger its finger force is reduced; but, the total grip force is compensated by an increased finger force of the index and little finger. Despite limitations due to the small number of patients, a DIPJ II- fusion might have a considerable effect on grip force and load distribution of the hand rather due to omitting this finger than purely biomechanical effects.
30045368	Mixed martial arts (MMA) is a combination of multiple combat sports. Acute injuries in MMA are well known and have been broadly described. However, there is little knowledge about degenerative changes in the musculoskeletal system. The aim of this study was to investigate the impact of techniques used in MMA on the occurrence of degenerative changes in the hand and wrist in comparison to classical boxing. 11 MMA fighters and 10 boxers with chronic wrist pain were clinically examined. Age, weight, years of training, number of fights, level of competition and weekly hours of training were recorded. To determine degenerative changes, an MRI of the symptomatic hand was assessed. Years of training, level of competition and number of fights did not show a significant difference between MMA and boxing fighters (p > 0.05), but MMA fighters showed significantly more hours of training per week (p < 0.001). The MMA fighters had more often and more severe degenerative changes of all examined structures (bone, fibrocartilage, ligaments and tendons), with the category 'bone' reaching significance (p = 0.002). MMA athletes show significantly greater incidence and degree of degeneration in hand and wrist joints. The exact reasons are still unknown and further research is needed to determine the influence of MMA techniques on the severity of degenerative changes in the hand and wrist.
30045369	We report on the outcomes of treatment for severe pain associated with long-standing, refractory CRPS in 10 female patients by continuous brachial plexus analgesia. The duration of the disease prior to treatment was 3.5 years on average, and mean baseline pain intensity was 8.3 on a numeric analogue scale (NRS). All patients met the Budapest criteria for the diagnosis of CRPS. A spinal catheter was implanted into the brachial plexus via an open axillary approach. Each patient underwent a mean of 4.4 (range 2-8) spinal catheter implantations. A rapid and strong analgesic effect was observed immediately after the injection of bupivacaine solution was started: Pain decreased from a mean of 8.3 to 1.6. The duration of maintaining the catheter in the brachial plexus and achieving effective analgesia was 5.3 months (range 2-12). After the removal of the catheter, the pain returned to baseline. No patient achieved a permanent, or at least partial, reduction of pain after completing this therapy.
30045370	This study was performed to determine whether between 2015 and 2017 there has been a change in the preferred method of treatment of Dupuytren disease by German hand surgeons, especially with respect to percutaneous needle fasciotomy. In 2015 and 2017, 530 members of the German Society for Surgery of the Hand were invited to take part in an online survey, asking for their preferred treatment for Dupuytren disease, including decision criteria and in relation to Tubiana stages. 110 and 101 responders, respectively, took part. In both surveys, 86 surgeons stated that they treated up to 100 patients per year (Group A), while 24 and 15 surgeons, respectively, treated more than 100 Dupuytren patients annually (Group B). In both surveys, limited fasciectomy was found to be the preferred method (82.9 % and 87.7 %). Treatment with clostridial collagenase is performed only sporadically (1.3 % or 1.4 %). Percutaneous needle fasciotomy is of minor relevance in stage I (19.1 % or 10.9 %) and II (16.4 % or 9.9 %) and is performed mainly by surgeons who treat more than 100 patients per year.The most important criterion for the decision on what treatment should be chosen was 'best outcome' (54.3 % and 68.6 %). Between 2015 and 2017, there was no great change in the choice of treatment for Dupuytren disease in Germany. In particular, there was no increase in PNF procedures.
30045371	We present two cases of chronic palmar luxation of the distal ulna which entails the development of complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS). Both cases have been finally treated with a hemiresection-interposition-arthroplasty of the distal radioulnar joint with perioperatively applied regional nerve block and i. v. administration of vitamin c. After surgical intervention function has improved and the CRPS symptomes subsided rapidly after few weeks.
30045376	Dynamic splinting is a well-known method for maintaining finger movement after ruptures of the extensor tendons. We describe a simple, inexpensive and easy-to-construct modification of a dynamic splint, called the 'Sparti' splint, suitable for a six-week period of rehabilitation of injured extensor tendons in zones V-VII.
30045382	Behçet's disease is a multi-system disease with inflammatory infestations, in particular of the small and middle arteries and veins. Histologically, the disease presents with the image of leukocytoclastic vasculitis. The etiology of Behçet disease is unknown, but genetic factors are discussed of playing a role in its pathogenesis. There is no known autoantibody, which could serve as a diagnostic tool. The disease usually affects patients in the 3. life decade and is rare in pediatrics. A very rare clinical form of Behçet's disease occurs during neonatal period. In this form life-threatening courses of the disease have been described. In this report a family with a diagnosed disorder of the mother, where the second child presented with ulcerations in the mucous membrane area during the first week of life, will be discussed. In this case, the question of a transfer of autoantibodies from the mother, which triggers the disease in the child, must be raised. The clinical progress will be compared to known cases in the literature in order to derive recommendations for a therapeutic procedure. In our patient, ANAs were transiently detected, which correlated to the mother's. Fortunately, the course of the disease was mild, so that no further treatment was necessary. But, potential life-threatening events should be always held in consideration. Here, steroids seem to be the treatment of choice. In the wake of the increasing immigration of pregnant Morbus Behçet patients from Mediterranean and from countries with higher prevalence of Morbus Behçet-positive mothers should be considered.
30045384	Recent registry data predict a significant increase in revision surgery in TKA, which is often associated with severe bony defects. Stable and correct implant fixation remains a challenge. The prerequisite for long-term and reproducible results is the selection of the correct reconstruction and fixation strategy, taking into account the existing bone defect as well as the patient-specific anatomy.
30045387	There has been a steady increase in the interest in regional health analysis. This is reflected both in national and international publications of health atlases. The aim of this study was to examine the current national health atlases, as instruments of communication, in a comparative analysis. First, a systematic internet search was done using Google, Unbubble and Bing. Prior to that, the term 'Atlas', search terms (e. g., atlas, health) and inclusions (e. g., period, language) had been defined. To categorize the result, 12 categories (e. g., data base, topics) and 89 attributes (e. g., epidemiology, drugs) were created. The results found were allocated to these categories and attributes in a matrix. 49 results were found, corresponding to the inclusion criteria. Only 16 of all results were an atlas in terms of the definition. The other findings can be classified as 'reports with maps'. Epidemiology and health care structure were a topic in 30 and 32, respectively of all the findings. Health care costs and prevention were found in 17 and 16 of all cases, respectively. The study has identified a variety of health atlases. However, the vast majority of all findings could be categorized as a report with maps of a different quality and not as atlases. Nevertheless, the analysis shows the basic interest in regional topics in the form of atlases for health sciences.
30045388	In February 2013, the law on the improvement of the rights of patients enacted a whole series of legal regulations for different areas of health care. In terms of physician liability, the Patient Rights Act and the introduction of sections 630a-h in the Civil Code (BGB) brought a transparency-oriented representation of general contractual aspects, a comprehensive legal regulation regarding patient education and consent, standardization of the treatment documentation, and a new basis for the right of access to the treatment file. The specificities of the treatment contract developed in the framework of supreme judicial jurisprudence were translated into legal form, and the presumed facts known from established case law and considered favorable to the patient under certain conditions were then summarized as exceptions to the principle of the objective burden of proof. In this paper the regulations in the new sections 630a-h of the Civil Code are presented and examined with regard to the consequences to be taken into account by the medical expert in the physician liability process.
30045394	Lower urinary tract fistulas are currently a rather rare, but severe condition associated with considerable morbidity. Treatment is challenging, especially in fistulas caused by pelvic malignancy or radiation therapy. Surgical treatment attempts fail in a considerable number of patients, especially in those with pelvic malignancies/prior radiation therapy or are precluded altogether due to severe comorbidity. For such patients percutaneous approaches can provide alternative treatment. This review is based on case studies and case reports dealing with percutaneous treatment options of lower urinary tract fistulas and leakages from the past four decades (1979 - 2017). The included techniques were ureteral fulguration, tissue adhesive-based embolization, non-detachable and detachable balloon occlusion, ureteral coiling, ureteral clipping, silicone or nylon plug as well as modified vascular plug embolization. Percutaneous treatment options of lower urinary tract fistulas and leakages allow for either permanent or temporary, instant ureteral occlusion. In general, transrenal ureteral occlusion is a safe and reliable alternative to surgical treatment of ureteral fistulas and leakages. So far, no technique has been proven to be superior to the others. Depending on the underlying disease, the optimal percutaneous technique may vary and should be chosen according to the individual needs of the patients. · Patients with therapy-refractory urerteral fistulas may benefit from transrenal ureteral occlusion.. · Transrenal ureteral occlusion allows for long-term symptom relief.. · Ureteral occlusion should be in the armamentarium of interventional radiologists.. · Kuetting D, Pieper CC . Percutaneous Treatment Options of Lower Urinary Tract Fistulas and Leakages. Fortschr Röntgenstr 2018; 190: 692 - 700.
30045395	Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) is a non-selective portosystemic shunt created using endovascular techniques. During recent years technical improvements and new insights into pathophysiology have modified indications for TIPS placement. In this article we therefore want to discuss current knowledge. A literature review was performed to review and discuss the pathophysiology, indications and results of the TIPS procedure. Established TIPS indications are persistent bleeding despite combined pharmacological and endoscopic therapy and rebleeding during the first five days. A new indication in the European recommendations is early TIPS placement within 72 hours, ideally within 24 hours, in patients bleeding from esophageal or gastroesophageal varices at high risk for treatment failure (e. g. Child-Pugh class C < 14 points or Child-Pugh class B with active bleeding) after initial pharmacological and endoscopic therapy. For prevention of recurrent variceal hemorrhage in the recommendations, covered TIPS placement is the treatment of choice only after failed first-line therapy, although numerous TIPS studies show a prolonged time to rebleeding and a reduction of mortality. Similarly for secondary prophylaxis in patients with refractory ascites, covered TIPS placement may be considered only if the patient continues to be intolerant to NSBBs and is an appropriate TIPS candidate even though studies show that the TIPS procedure controls ascites, improves survival and renal function better than paracentesis. Potential indications for TIPS implantation are Budd-Chiari syndrome, acute portal vein thromboses, hydrothorax, hepatopulmonary and hepatorenal syndrome (Typ 2), portal hypertensive gastropathy (PHG) and prophylaxis of complications of abdominal surgery, very rarely bleeding in ectopic varices or in patients with chylothorax or chylous ascites. TIPS placement is an established procedure with a new indication as 'early TIPS'. In the European recommendations it is only the second-line therapy for prevention of recurrent variceal hemorrhage and for secondary prophylaxis in patients with refractory ascites although several studies showed a clear benefit of the TIPS procedure compared to ligation and NSBBs. · In addition to already established indications, new European recommendations suggest early TIPS placement in patients bleeding from esophageal or gastroesophageal varices at high risk for treatment failure.. · Strunk H, Marinova M, . Transjugular Intrahepatic Portosystemic Shunt (TIPS): Pathophysiologic Basics, Actual Indications and Results with Review of the Literature. Fortschr Röntgenstr 2018; 190: 701 - 711.
30045396	The aim of this study was to investigate the diagnostic value of cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR)-derived strain parameters in patients with sarcoidosis, and to compare results to standard CMR markers of sarcoidosis (edema/T2 ratio, early gadolinium enhancement, late gadolinium enhancement) for prediction of disease outcome. 61 patients with biopsy-proven sarcoidosis underwent CMR examination. According to CMR results, patients were divided into two different groups: patients with (CMR+; n = 23) and without (CMR-; n = 38) findings consistent with cardiac sarcoidosis. In addition, a group of healthy age-matched volunteers (controls; n = 22) served as controls. Left ventricular functional parameters as well as left ventricular longitudinal and circumferential strain were evaluated in all three groups. Compared to controls, global longitudinal strain (GLS) was significantly impaired in patients with sarcoidosis, irrespective of cardiac involvement. No significant differences in GLS could be revealed between CMR+ and CMR- patients. Circumferential strain parameters were significantly impaired in CMR+ patients in comparison to CMR- patients and controls, while no significant differences could be revealed between CMR- patients and controls. GLS was significantly lower in patients with a negative outcome compared to controls. Compared to the rest of the CMR+ and CMR- patients, the GLS in patients with a negative outcome was further reduced but did not reach statistical significance. GLS is the only strain parameter detecting left ventricular functional impairment in sarcoidosis patients with otherwise unsuspicious CMR and controls. GLS is further reduced in patients with a negative outcome. Thus, GLS may have the potential to serve as a marker for early cardiac involvement in sarcoidosis. · GLS is significantly impaired in sarcoidosis patients with an otherwise inconspicuous CMR, compared to controls. · GLS is reduced in patients with a negative outcome. · GLS may serve as a marker for early cardiac involvement in sarcoidosis. · Dabir D, Meyer D, Kuetting D et al. Diagnostic Value of Cardiac Magnetic Resonance Strain Analysis for Detection of Cardiac Sarcoidosis. Fortschr Röntgenstr 2018; 190: 712 - 721.
30045397	To investigate the degree of impairment in left (LV) and right ventricular (RV) myocardial strain parameters over the course of acute myocarditis and to evaluate its value for the prediction of functional recovery upon follow-up. 69 patients with acute myocarditis underwent cardiac magnetic resonance imaging during the acute stage (baseline) and after a mean 92.5 ± 50.4 days follow-up. Standard 'Lake Louise' criteria (T2 signal intensity ratio, early gadolinium enhancement ratio and late gadolinium enhancement) and feature tracking derived LV and RV strain parameters were assessed. Logistic regression analysis was used to find predictors of functional recovery upon follow-up. All inflammatory parameters showed a considerable decrease over the course of the disease (P < 0.001 for all parameters). LV and RV function significantly improved on follow-up CMR (LV ejection fraction: 53.5 ± 12.7 % vs. 61.3 ± 9.5 %; P < 0.001, RV ejection fraction: 54.1 ± 10.0 % vs. 59.4 ± 6.3 %; P < 0.001). LV and RV myocardial strain (longitudinal, circumferential and radial strain) significantly improved from baseline to follow-up (P < 0.05 for all parameters). On multivariate analysis, LV global peak systolic longitudinal strain (OR: 0.303; P = 0.007) was the only independent predictor of functional recovery upon follow-up.  CONCLUSION:  Alterations in LV and RV functional strain parameters occur frequently during the acute stage of myocarditis. During the course of the disease, a significant improvement in LV and RV strain parameters can be observed. It further appears that initial LV longitudinal strain may serve as a new parameter for the prediction of functional recovery upon follow-up. · Myocardial strain parameters significantly improve during the course of acute myocarditis.. · RV dysfunction can frequently be observed during the acute stage of myocarditis.. · LV longitudinal strain can independently predict functional recovery upon follow-up.. · Luetkens JA, Petry P, Kuetting D et al. Left and right ventricular strain in the course of acute myocarditis: a cardiovascular magnetic resonance study. Fortschr Röntgenstr 2018; 190: 722 - 732.
30045398	Acute portal vein thrombosis is a potentially fatal condition. In symptomatic patients not responding to systemic anticoagulation, interventional procedures have emerged as an alternative to surgery. This study sought to retrospectively evaluate initial results of interventional treatment of acute portal vein thrombosis (aPVT) using a transjugular interventional approach. Between 2014 and 2016, 11 patients were treated because of aPVT (male: 7; female: 4; mean age: 41.06 years). All patients presented a rapid onset of symptoms without collateralization of portal flow as assessed by a CT scan at the time of admittance. The patients showed thrombotic occlusion of the main portal vein (11/11), the lienal vein (10/11) and the superior mesenteric vein (10/11). Different techniques for recanalization were employed: catheter thromboaspiration (1/9), AngioJet device (7/9), local-lysis-only (1/9) and TIPSS (7/9). Local lysis was administered using a dual (4/9) or single (5/9) catheter technique. The mean follow-up was 24.32 months. In 9 patients transhepatic access was successful. Initially reduction of thrombus load and recanalization were achieved in all 9 cases with residual thrombi in PV (n = 3), SMV (n = 7), and IL (n = 5). In the collective undergoing interventional procedures (n = 9) rethrombosis and continuous abdominal pain were seen in one patient, and thrombus progression after successful recanalization was seen in another. Freedom from symptoms could be achieved in 6 patients. One patient developed peritoneal and pleural effusion, respiratory insufficiency and portosystemic collaterals. Both patients who could not undergo an interventional procedure developed a cavernous transformation of the portal vein. One of them also had continuous intermittent abdominal pain. Interventional percutaneous approaches are able to improve patient outcome in patients with aPVT. It appears to be of utmost importance to not only remove/reduce the thrombotic material but to establish sufficient inflow and outflow by TIPS and simultaneous multi-catheter thrombolysis. · Pharmacomechanic thrombectomy in combination with local thrombolysis is a feasible approach. · The transjugular transhepatic approach seems to be a safe procedure. · TIPSS and dual catheter lysis may support flow management. · Wolter K, Decker G, Kuetting D et al. Interventional Treatment of Acute Portal Vein Thrombosis. Fortschr Röntgenstr 2018; 190: 740 - 746.
30045399	Quantitative and qualitative analysis of gadopentetate dimeglumine (GD) versus standard-dose (sGb) and half-dose (hGb) gadobutrol in thoracoabdominal time-resolved contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance angiography (4D-MRA) with dynamic computed tomography (dCT) as the quantitative reference in minipigs. 7 anesthetized Goettingen minipigs received thoracoabdominal dCT (0.37 s rotation time) and transverse 4D-MRA (0.3 s/dynamic frame;) using sGb and hGb. 8 other minipigs received coronal 4D-MRA (1.3 s/dynamic frame; sGb, hGb, SGD). dCT attenuation levels were converted into absolute gadolinium concentrations and compared to 4D-MRA peak signal intensities (SI). Bolus lengths were quantified by full width at half maximum (FWHM) measurements. After this comparison of dose effects on SI in transverse 4D-MRA, coronal 4D-MRAs were analyzed regarding both quantitative and qualitative parameters. In dCT (transverse 4D-MRA) hGb showed 39.0 % (14.5 %) lower arterial peak gadolinium concentrations (peak SIs) and 20.6 % (33.8 %) shorter FWHM compared to sGb. The difference was due to peak plateaus or reversals in 4D-MRA in 5/7 animals. While sGb led to the highest peak SIs, image quality ratings of arteries were rated similarly high with all contrast agent protocols despite a slightly higher SI with sGb. In contrast, venous peak SIs and image quality ratings were significantly higher when using sGb. Peak Gd concentrations and 4D-MRA peak SIs are highest with sGB. These differences are most evident in the venous phase leading to superior image quality in multi-phase 4D-MRA. · Standard-dose gadobutrol offers high vascular gadolinium concentrations and 4D-MRA peak signals.. · Absolute vascular gadolinium concentrations and 4D-MRA peak signal intensities at 3 T diverge.. · Peak plateaus or reversals cause decreased arterial 4D-MRA peak signals at 3 T.. · Arterial image quality is rated similarly high using different contrast agent protocols.. · Venous vessel visibility in 4D-MRA is significantly better using standard dose gadobutrol.. · Hadizadeh DR, Keil VC, Jost G et al. Contrast Media in Time-Resolved MRA at 3T: A Systematic Quantitative and Qualitative Analysis of Concentration and Dose Effects on Image Parameters in Minipigs. Fortschr Röntgenstr 2018; 190: 747 - 757.
30045400	To directly compare different methods proposed for enhanced conspicuity and discriminability of prostate cancer on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) and to compare the results to original DWI images and conventional apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) maps. Clinical routine prostate DWI datasets (b = 0, 50, 800 s/mm², acquired at a field strength of 3 T) of 104 consecutive patients with subsequent MR-guided prostate biopsy were included in this retrospective study. For each dataset exponential ADC maps (eADC), computed DWI images (cDWI), and additionally eADC maps for computed b-values of 2000 and 3000 s/mm² were generated (c_eADC). For each of 123 lesions, the contrast (CR) and contrast-to-noise ratio (CNR) were determined. Differences in the CR and CNR of malignant lesions (n = 83) between the different image types and group differences between benign (n = 40), low-risk (n = 53) and high-risk (n = 30) lesions were assessed by repeated measures ANOVA and one-way ANOVA with post-hoc tests. The ability to differentiate between benign and malignant and between low-risk and high-risk lesions was assessed by receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analyses. The CR and CNR were higher for computed DWI and related c_eADC at b = 3000 s/mm² and 2000 s/mm² compared to original DWI, conventional ADC and standard eADC. For differentiation of benign and malignant lesions, conventional ADC and CR of conventional ADC were best suited. For discrimination of low-risk from high-risk lesions, the CR of c_eADC was best suited followed by the CR of cDWI. Computed cDWI or related c_eADC maps at b-values between 2000 and 3000 s/mm2 were superior to the original DWI, conventional ADC and eADC in the detection of prostate cancer. · Prostate cancer can appear inconspicuous on original DWI800 images. · Computed DWI images at b = 2000 - 3000 s/mm² improve lesion-to-normal-tissue contrast in prostate cancer. · Contrast in computed DWI is superior to ADC and eADC at b = 800 s/mm². · Sprinkart AM, Marx C, Träber F et al. Evaluation of Exponential ADC (eADC) and Computed DWI (cDWI) for the Detection of Prostate Cancer. Fortschr Röntgenstr 2018; 190: 758 - 766.
30045413	Psychotherapeutic resources are limited, leading to prolonged waiting periods prior to outpatient psychotherapy. Low-intensity interventions have the potential to bridge such treatment gaps. This systematic review aims to identify interventions targeting depressive symptoms implemented prior to outpatient psychotherapy, and to assess their effectiveness and acceptance. 22 studies were identified. Interventions were classified as active waiting, self-help, guided self-help, brief single-strand interventions, and low-intensity psychotherapy. Evidence of intervention effectiveness is limited; intervention acceptance varies between interventions. The resulting classification illustrates a range of innovative interventions which can be implemented into routine care depending on existing resources and preferences. Different models for the provision of low-intensity interventions are discussed.
30045414	Damage to the hand caused by vibration has been observed with a range of trades and professions and in connection with various types of sport. Osseous, neurogenic and vascular lesions can lead to chronic ailments and permanent functional impairment. Hand-arm vibration syndrome (HAVS) and hypothenar/thenar hammer syndrome (HHS, THS) are interesting for vascular medicine. From a surgical perspective, there is a special significance in the fact that both syndromes are recognised occupational diseases (BK 2104 and BK 2114) which have to be acknowledged by an accident insurance doctor and in the medical report. Hypothenar/thenar hammer syndrome is caused by repeated force exerted in the region of the small finger or the ball of the thumb and is characterised by a trauma-induced lesion of the ulnar artery or radial artery that can lead to pain due to ischaemia in the acral area supplying blood to the arteries of the affected hand, usually the dominant hand. It is considered to be hand-arm vibration syndrome when there is a heightened sensitivity to coldness with vasospastic circulatory disturbance. The paper presents various clinical and functional diagnostic tests to enable a diagnosis. Doppler and duplex ultrasound exploration play an important role. Various radiological methods can augment diagnostic testing. The symptoms can be treated using medication or physiotherapy to improve perfusion by stimulating vasodilatation. An effective causal therapy is currently not available. Thus, when drawing up the medical report, particular attention should be paid to gathering information about the patient's medical history so that an unequivocal link can be made between the cause of the damage and the physical damage, as this could have sociomedical and pension-relevant consequences for the patient.
30048997	Active fall prevention requires analysis of the mechanisms provoking falls and the subsequent initiation of appropriate counteracting measures. This is crucial for the quality management of all rehabilitation programs. There is primary and secondary fall prevention. For the latter, specific and individualized measures have to be taken after the first fall. We here present a practical approach to fall prevention for a better rehabilitation outcome. Fall prevention intervention represents a key component of rehabilitation programs.
30048998	Incidence and survival rates in patients with cancer are rising as well as the potential rehabilitation needs. In contrast, the numbers of rehabilitation treatments after cancer are decreasing. The reasons are not yet completely understood. A written survey with patients of three cancer indications breast cancer, prostate cancer and colon cancer after acute medical treatment. 376 persons participated and were asked for rehabilitation utilisation, reasons against medical rehabilitation and subjective health status. Statistical analyses were mainly performed descriptively. Half of the participants used a medical rehabilitation. Those patients were more affected in subjective health and showed a higher level of disease severity. Participants who refused the utilisation of a medical rehabilitation mentioned primarily family, personal and private reasons. The written survey provided a variety of reasons why a medical rehabilitation is not used after cancer disease. From this data, suggestions for the optimization of rehabilitation and organizational arrangements can be derived.
30048999	We investigated the prevalence of multidrug resistant pathogens in patients of oncologic and cardiologic rehabilitation units with 155 oncologic and 157 cardiologic patients undergoing microbiologic screening. It was found that 4.5% of oncologic as well as cardiologic patients were colonized with multidrug resistant pathogens. 2-MRGN and ESBL were the most encountered species (2.9%). 3-MRGN were found twice as frequent in oncologic patients (2.6 and 1.3%). Overall oncologic and cardiologic patients exhibit comparatively low prevalence rates for multidrug resistant pathogens.
30049000	Over the last years the prevalence of diabetes mellitus (DM) has risen. Due to the disease pattern an increasing importance of rehabilitation services is assumed as well. This article contributs to the debate by analyising the use of medical rehabilitations from 2006 to 2013. The secondary data analysis is based on a scientific use file. DM is defined according to ICD-10 (E10-E14). The trends stratified by age and gender are displayed crude and standardized per 100.000. The use will be correlated with the population-based prevalence on the level of federal states. The standardized use rose from 2006 to 2013 in men from 170 to 204.4 and woman from 99 to 123.6 per 100.000. While it declined for people under 60 years old, it rose by about 80% in the age group of the 60-64 year-olds. The use correlated positively (r=0.64) with the population-based prevalence. As a result of increasingly late retierment, the importance of rehabilitation services in people with DM incesases.
30049001	Most disorders in neurological and neurosurgical early rehabilitation (NNER) are associated with an increased pneumonia risk. Respiratory therapy aims to prevent respiratory complications. However, there are no studies showing an effect of respiratory muscle training on the incidence of pneumonia in NNER. The study included 81 phase-B-patients receiving respiratory muscle training and 81 control patients. Routine data such as age, sex, diagnoses, and comorbidities, length of stay, information on ventilation and incidence of pneumonia were analyzed retrospectively. The development of pneumonia was associated with a longer duration of treatment, a higher number of ventilation hours, the presence of a tracheal canula, and a tendency to lower Early Rehabilitation Barthel-Index on admission. The incidence rate of nosocomial pneumonia was 20% in both study groups. The groups differed significantly in disease severity on admission, duration of treatment, number of dysphagia patients, and in therapy intensities of physio and speech therapy. A direct correlation between the respiratory muscle training and the incidence of pneumonia in the NNER could not be conclusively demonstrated due to the insufficient comparability of both study groups. Besides the duration of ventilation, the intensity of dysphagia therapy was the strongest factor influencing the pneumonia incidence.
30049020	Recent research has shown changes of the intestinal flora in anorexia nervosa (AN) patients. Alpha diversity (AD) represents the number of different bacterial species in the gut. Reduced AD and a leaky gut (zonulin) lead to inflammation and changes in nutrient absorption. AD was calculated from stool samples of 18 AN patients and 20 normal weight controls (NC) after 16S ribosomal RNA sequencing. Furthermore, Zonulin as an indicator of gut barrier function and inflammation parameters were investigated. AN patients had significantly lower AD compared to NC (number of observed species p=0.042, Chao1 Diversity Index p=0.043). Zonulin was not significantly altered in AN patients compared to NC. There were no significant correlations of serum parameters and AD. Regardless of gut permeability, AN patients showed significantly decreased AD compared to NC. Decreased AD can have an additional negative impact on calorie intake in AN. These results contribute to a better understanding of the illness and the development of new therapeutic options.
30051752	Sleep and mental disorders in childhood and adolescence Abstract. Sleep problems and disorders are common in childhood and adolescence. This review aims to throw light on the relationship between sleep problems and mental disorders in childhood and adolescence. Sleep problems and disorders appear to be risk factors for mental disorders as comorbidities, as symptoms, and as effects of mental disorders. Frequently, there is an interaction between sleep behaviour and psychopathology so that sleep problems contribute to the intensity and maintenance of mental disorders. This bidirectional association is observed in early childhood as well as in school-aged children and in adolescents. Many studies show that this association has a long-term nature beyond child development. Both environmental and genetic factors seem to play a role in the development and maintenance of the relationship between sleep problems and mental disorders. Various research articles show that treatment of mental disorders and treatment of sleep disorders influence each other in a positive way. Therefore, it is strongly advised to consider sleep problems in diagnosis and treatment but also in prevention of mental disorders.
30053761	Spondylodiscitis is an infection of the intervertebral disc with subsequent infection of the adjacent vertebral bodies. The main causes are 3 pathogen groups: bacteria, particularly tuberculosis pathogens, fungi and parasites. In pyogenic spondylodiscitis, infections with Staphylococcus aureus are the most common, with an incidence of up to 80%. Mortality is around 2 - 3%. Infections with tuberculosis are often associated with psoas and paravertebral abscesses. Neurological deficits are registered in up to 50% of patients. For microbiological diagnostic testing, blood cultures are used for aerobic and anaerobic bacteria. However, histological examination leads significantly more frequently to positive pathogen detection. In tissue samples, results with 16S rRNA PCR results are clearly superior to results from microbiological examination. The MRI exhibits high sensitivity and specificity and is therefore superior to other radiological methods. Elimination of the infection, pain reduction and stabilisation of the spine are the main objectives of any treatment. A standardised antibiotic therapy for spondylodiscitis has not been clearly defined. Pathogen detection is important, with focused antibiotic therapy. Antibiotic therapy should initially be administered intravenously for 2 - 4 weeks. This should be followed by oral administration for 6 - 12 weeks. In the case of antibiotic-resistant infections with neurological deficiencies, it is recommended to perform a surgical procedure, with careful debridement and instrumentation as well as i. v. administered antibiotics for 3 weeks followed by three month oral antibiotic treatment. Surgical procedures are indicated with neurological deficits, progressive increase in spinal deformities, failure of conservative therapy with insufficient pain relief and unreliable pathogen identification. The selection of the surgical procedure should mainly be based on the extent and localisation of bone destruction and the individual circumstances of the patients. The prognosis is good if there is a clear reduction in CRP and ESR in the first few weeks.
30053762	Fractures of the os sacrum without relevant trauma history are defined as stress or insufficiency fractures and often affect the anterior pelvis. Sacral insufficiency fractures are associated with osteoporosis and occur under physiological load. In contrast, sacral stress fractures are caused by mechanical overloading. Diagnostic confirmation is delayed in many of these patients. Thus, MRI and/or CT should be performed early. Fracture stability should be evaluated by CT. MRI is the better approach to rule out fractures and is highly sensitive. It is indicated in young patients and in patients with non-specific lumbosacral pain. Nuclear imaging techniques are viable alternatives in patients with a contraindication for MRI.
30053763	In routine clinical work, the dosage of direct oral anticoagulants for long-term maintenance therapy after acute deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism is often made on an individual basis. As two doses are available for the preparations apixaban and rivaroxaban and no separate indication spectra have been specified. The working group of practising vascular physicians and surgeons in Germany has therefore developed this position paper. Patients with a clearly identified and temporary trigger factor for venous thromboembolism (e.g. trauma, operation, acute internal disease, oral contraception or pregnancy or isolated thrombosis of veins in the lower leg have a lower risk of recurrence and are generally not given permanent anticoagulation. If there is a high risk of recurrence with unchanged trigger factor (e.g. active malignancy, unambiguous antiphospholipid syndrome or deficiency of a clotting factor, such as Protein C, Protein S or antithrombin with a positive family history of venous thromboembolism, first occurrence of a pulmonary embolism, multiple recurrence of VTE) prolonged maintenance therapy is indicated, unless this is contraindicated by a very high risk of bleeding. For all patients with former VTE and whose anticoagulation phase has in principle been completed, prolonged prophylaxis can be continued, as these patients too are at increased risk of VTE.
30053765	There are differences in the prevalence estimates of depressive disorders based on primary and secondary data. The reasons for this are, for instance, the use of divergent indicators and varying observation periods. This study examines the prevalence of depressive disorders using survey and routine data for a comparable survey period and age range. Effects of differences between data sources and indicators are estimated. For 2010, 3 indicators are compared: in a population survey collected a) self-reported medical diagnosis of depression, b) diagnosis of depressive disorders identified by clinical interviews and c) administrative depression diagnoses collected from routine data of a statutory health insurance. In sensitivity analyses, privately insured participants of the population survey were excluded, and insured persons with care needs were excluded from routine data. The definition of administrative depression diagnosis was varied depending on the frequency of coded diagnoses and the specificity of the diagnoses. The highest prevalence (9.8%) was found for depression diagnoses from administrative data, the lowest prevalence (5.9%) in self-reported medical diagnoses of depression in the population survey. The prevalence of depression identified by clinical interviews was 8.4%. Differing age and gender-related courses of illness were found. The administrative prevalence dropped significantly if unspecific diagnoses (F3x.8, F3x.9) were excluded. Depending on the definition of depression diagnoses used in administrative data, there was a reduction in differences of prevalence compared to the self-reported medical diagnoses. Differences in prevalence based on a diagnosis of a depressive disorder identified in a clinical interview remained stable, which indicates different groups of persons.
30060273	Patients with peripheral artery disease are at high-risk for cardiovascular events. Anti-thrombotic treatment is very important for secondary prevention. In symptomatic patients single antiplatelet therapy with clopidogrel or Aspirin is recommended. After peripheral revascularisation transient dual antiplatelet therapy is widely used although there is only little evidence. Following peripheral bypass surgery most patients are treated with single antiplatelet therapy, in some cases (prostetic bypass grafts) dual antiplated therapy can be useful and selected patients with complex venous grafts might profit from anticoagulation with vitamin K antagonists.The recent publication of the COMPASS (Cardiovascular OutcoMes for People Using Anticoagulation StrategieS) study showed relevant reduction of MACE (Major Adverse Cariac Events) and MALE (Major Adverse Limb Events) for the combined therapy of rivaroxaban 2 × 2,5 mg compared to Aspirin 100 mg with increased risk for gastrointestinal bleeding. In the current VOYAGER PAD (Vascular Outcomes Study of Aspirin along with Rivaroxaban in Endovascular or Surgical Limb Revascularization for PAD) study this concept is tested after peripheral revascularisation.
30060274	Medullary thyroid cancer (MTC) arises from parafollicular C cells of the thyroid gland and is characterized by a calcitonin secretion. Basal calcitonin correlates with the tumor mass and is used as highly sensitive and specific tumor marker for MTC. Based on former assays, unspecific calcitonin increase has frequently been seen in Hashimoto's thyroiditis, kidney insufficiency, proton pump inhibitors etc. This phenomenon is now less often seen with modern assays. The consequent use of calcitonin measurement in nodular goiter helps to identify the rare MTC at an early stage. The best cut-off values to differentiate micro-MTC from C-cell hyperplasia and other unspecific calcitonin elevations were achieved by the use of a 30 pg/ml and a 60 pg/ml threshold in women and men, respectively. This approach is not less sensitive than formerly used pentagastrin stimulation. A calcitonin value > 100 pg/ml is nearly 100 % predictive for MTC. Therefore, the Thyroid Section of the German Society of Endocrinology recommends a thyroidectomy in woman with serum calcitonin values > 30 pg/ml (grey zone 20 - 30 pg/ml) and in man with serum calcitonin values > 60 pg/ml (grey zone 30 -60 pg/ml). Lower calcitonin values should be re-evaluated in intervals of 3 - 6 months; rising calcitonin levels may indicate an MTC. In this case, thyroid operation should be performed. The cure rate of MTC with calcitonin values < 100 pg/ml is nearly 100 % done by high volume surgeons.
30060275	Infectious diseases are still very common in older adults ad they are responsilble for nearly the most deaths in those patients. Especially geriatric patients show higher morbidity and mortality. Therefore, it is very important to start antibiotic therapy as fast as possible after diagnosis. Beyond physiological organ changes, immunosenescene leads to a higher susceptibility for infections in this special patient group. Atypical symptoms cause a delayed initial therapy. Changes in pharmacokinetics, multimorbidity and plypharmacy induce a high risk for adverse sideeffects and interactions. Indicating antibiotic therapy, local resistance and severity of disease has to be considered.
30060276	Immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) is a heterogeneous disease. Diagnosis of primary ITP continues to be based on the exclusion of all known causes for secondary ITP. The new ITP classification distinguishes three categories. First line treatment consists of either dexamethasone or prednisone. The most effective options in second line treatment are splenectomy or thrombopoietin receptor agonists. The medical societies for hematology and oncology of the German-speaking countries have recently updated their guidelines on ITP.
30060277	Severe hyperlactaemia in intensive care patients is most often due to underlying sepsis or septic, cardiogenic or haemorrhagic shock. Hyperlactaemia is an independent predictor of death in various groups of critically ill patients. With serum lactate values > 10 mmol/l 80 % of the patients die in intensive care, and if the severe lactic acidosis persists for 48 hours, all patients die. Increased lactate levels require immediate diagnostic work-up and classification. The new sepsis definition requires a serum lactate > 2 mmol/l for septic shock with adequate volume substitution and vasopressor administration in order to achieve a mean arterial pressure in persistent hypotension ≥ 65 mmHg. The 1-hour bundle of the Surviving Sepsis Campaign published in 2018 recommends as a first measure the determination of the lactate serum concentrations, and increased values should be closely monitored. In addition, blood culture sampling, broad-spectrum antibiotics, fluid resuscitation and vasopressor administration are recommended within the first hour. Large amounts of crystalloids should be given for increased lactate levels (≥ 4 mmol/l) and refractory hypotension, the administration of fluids can be adjusted according to lactate clearance. Lactate metabolism is prolonged in patients with liver function impairment. Lactate levels on admission to intensive care are significantly associated with the number of failing organs and mortality in patients with cirrhosis. 12-hour lactate clearance has a strong predictive prognosis for survival in patients with baseline lactate levels above 5 mmol/l, the latter remains an independent predictor for the severity of the underlying disease even after correction. The greater the decrease in lactate during the initial therapy, the better the outcome.
30060278	Vaccination practices in Germany are driven by scientific developments and a complex regulatory environment. Some important developments in 2018 are described here: Starting in 2018 only quadrivalent influenza vaccines will be used for the seasonal vaccination. Despite the availability of meningococcus ACWY and B vaccines and their use in other countries only the type C conjugate vaccine will be used for the routine vaccination of children. For the first time there is now an official recommendation to also vaccinate boys against HPV using either the bivalent or the nonavalent vaccine. After promising trial results a timely guideline for the use of the newly available adjuvanted subunit zoster vaccine is to be expected. Negative trial results mark a major setback for the development of a CMV vaccine. While only developed during the 2013 - 16 outbreak a highly effective Ebola vaccine is already being distributed to fight the current Congo outbreak.
30060279	DAPT DURATION DEPENDS ON THE INDIVIDUAL ISCHEMIC- VS. The updated ESC guidelines on dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) focus on individualization of therapy. It is recommended to plan DAPT duration depending on the individual ischemic- vs. bleeding risk of the patient. Evaluation of ischemic- and bleeding risk may be done using heart teams and risk scores respectively. It is underlined that the decision regarding DAPT duration is dynamic and should be re-assessed on a regular basis. For the first time, it is recommended to choose duration of DAPT irrespectively of stent type (bare metal- vs. drug eluting stent). DAPT duration form one- up to 36 months may be considered depending on the individual risk of the patient. Therefore the sight on DAPT has changed from a device dependent therapy to a systemic therapy in patients with coronary artery disease. In this context, recommendations regarding patients with acute coronary syndrome with medical treatment alone (including patients with myocardial infarction with non-obstructive coronary arteries) and undergoing aorto-coronary bypass graft surgery were amended. DAPT is recommended in both groups. Duration of DAPT depends on the individual risk as outlined above. In patients with non-ST elevation myocardial infarction, the initiation of P2Y12 inhibition may already be considered at time of diagnosis if an invasive approach is planned. Additionally, new recommendations regarding patients with coronary interventions and indication for permanent oral anticoagulation due to atrial fibrillation were established. In these patients non vitamin K oral anticoagulants (NOAC) may be considered instead of vitamin K antagonists. Again, duration of DAPT plus oral anticoagulation (triple therapy) should be recommended according to the individual ischemic- and bleeding risk of the patient. Triple therapy only during hospital course and single antiplatelet medication plus oral anticoagulation already at hospital discharge may even be considered in patients with high bleeding risk.
30060280	Acute Kidney Injury (AKI) remains a frequent and serious complication in hospitalized individuals worldwide. The current article will focus on three AKI-related aspects: prevention of contrast-Induced Nephropathy with sodium chloride vs. sodium bicarbonate (PRESERVE trial), kidney-related unwanted side effects of Sodium-Glucose co-Transporter-2-antagonists (SGLT-2-inhibitors), and the utilization of certain types of stem/progenitor cells for AKI therapy.
30060281	Interventional bronchoscopy plays a significant role in the treatment of various pulmonary diseases. Different endoscopic therapeutic modalities are available for the management of central airway obstruction (CAO) that represent a common indication for interventional bronchoscopy. The latest development in the field of CAO management are biodegradable stents, that would maintain the airway patency over time, then gradually degrade and vanish from the airway. Other indications for interventional bronchoscopy are chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), emphysema, asthma and chronic bronchitis. Thereby, various techniques of endoscopic lung volume reduction (ELVR) that address at hyperinflation reduction extend the therapeutic spectrum of patients with severe emphysema. Targeted lung denervation that aims a persistent bronchodilation present an area of current research in the field of COPD and asthma. In patients with chronic bronchitis, cryospray therapy that is performed within clinical trials may reduce the amount of secretion.
30060282	The therapy of fibromyalgia is based on conservative therapeutic approaches such as increased physical activity, supportive physiotherapy and coping strategies. Secondarily, pain-modulating therapies can be used. A first line therapy with NSAIDs or opioids is not recommended. This article will discuss the current evidence based therapeutic concepts as well as promising new therapeutic approaches.
30060283	In Germany, an estimated 19 000 people will develop pancreatic carcinoma in 2018. The 5-year survival rate of all pancreatic carcinoma patients is very low at around 6 %, and the potentially curative operation is only possible in 15 - 20 % of patients. More frequent use and combination of systemic chemotherapeutic agents has led to improved life expectancy in recent years. In this article we will summarize recent therapeutic strategies depending on tumor status and current approaches to personalized medicine in pancreatic carcinoma.
30060285	A healthy 41 year old man was bitten by a tick while on safari in the Kruger National Park in South Africa. He developed severe fever and malaise 5 days later. A characteristic red skin sore with a dark centre and surrounding erythema (eschar, tache noir) developed at the site of the tick bite. The travel history and clinical picture were strongly suggestive of a tick borne fever. The diagnosis of tick bite fever caused by rickettsia (spotted fever group) was proven serologically. The clinical course of the disease was complicated by myocarditis, indicated by an elevated troponin I and later confirmed by cardio-MRI. The complicated clinical course and the singular eschar suggested Rickettsia conorii as the etiological agent. The rickettsial infection was treated with doxycycline, which led to a rapid improvement of the patient's clinical status. However, recovery from this imported infection was delayed due to myocarditis. Rickettsioses should be included in the differential diagnosis in travellers returning from Africa. The clinical course is usually mild but can be complicated by involvement of major organs even in formerly healthy young people.
30060288	Therapeutic relationship in forensic psychiatry is believed to be affected by the coercive setting and the role conflict of the therapists as both treaters and court-appointed experts. The aim of the study was to examine and compare the therapeutic relationship in forensic and general psychiatric settings. 52 forensic patients and 66 general psychiatric patients filled in the Psychopathy Personality Inventory - Revised (PPI-R), the Inventory of Interpersonal Problems - German Version (IIP-D), the Questionnaire on Motivation for Psychotherapy (Fragebogen zur Erfassung der Psychotherapiemotivation (FPTM)) as well as the Working Alliance Inventory - Short Revised (WAI-SR). We applied descriptive analyses, calculated univariate <i>t</i>-tests as well as multivariate <i>T</i>-tests and performed general linear models. The quality of the therapeutic alliance does not differ significantly between forensic and general psychiatric patients. Moreover, patients of forensic psychiatry consider therapeutic techniques applied by their therapists as more valuable for achieving their therapeutic aims than patients of the general psychiatry. The therapeutic relationship in forensic psychiatry is as viable as in general psychiatry. This can be regarded as a result of the long-term therapy in the context of forensic psychiatry which allows more time to be spent on relationship building than in a general psychiatry setting where therapy is limited to a few weeks.
30060289	Whereas from a professional point of view, a medical treatment might seem necessary, this treatment might be refused by the patient. In such cases, the patient's ability to determine his will is the key. Any substitutive medical decision is justified by a specific normative framework. The dialectic between a patient's inability to determine his will and the conviction of physicians about the necessity of a medical intervention is reformulated from a medical-anthropological point of view. This dialectic leads to a substitutive decision-making on the basis of a presumed will beyond the elemental will due to the breakdown of mental capacity/legal competence. After bracketing out legal concepts, assumptions mirroring canonical conceptions of individual autonomy are carved out. Then the medical encounter involving medically necessary treatments rejected by the patients is analyzed from an anthropological point of view. Hereby, both i) the asymmetry in the understanding and implementation of necessary medical measures, and ii) the emotional resonance capability between physician and patient are discussed. Based on these observations, a criticism of a solely individualistic conception of the mentally ill without any consideration of social interconnections will be developed. Finally, criteria for the assessment of mental capacity as well as for a pragmatic and prudent decision-making under uncertainty are proposed. Mental capacity and legal competence as normative concepts mean the autonomy to act towards sustainable self-care. It can be understood as the competence of judging one's own intentions; this competence includes the balanced interpretation of contingencies and forecasting the scope of consequences. The canonical dialectic between self-sufficiency (corresponding to mental capacity) and subsidiarity (according to substitutive decisions) is based, within the framework proposed here, on treatment asymmetry and personal resonance. When considering substitutive decisions, the relevant social micro systems the patient is embedded in should be taken into account. The anthropological examination of the dialectic between autonomy (based on mental capacity) and substitutive decisions leads to a reflection on individual decision-making with uncertain denouement rather than unequivocal, categorical solutions. All stakeholders and relevant others should be taken into account in the decision-making process.
30064147	The prevalence of diabetes mellitus (DM) or malnutrition in hospitalised patients depends on the clinical domain, but is much higher than in the normal population. In trauma surgery, this increase is frequently associated with more postoperative complications and constantly rising costs. In addition, the quality of life of this target group is decreased, but there are only limited data from departments of traumatology and/or orthopaedics. Therefore, we aim to analyse the factors influencing the postoperative complication rate as well as the quality of life of orthopaedic and trauma patients. Within this prospective trial in the period of 06/2014 to 02/2017, we analysed data of 1643 patients from traumatology - geriatric and septic traumatology - as well as endoprosthetics with regard to the clinical outcome, the complication rate and the quality of life (Short Form Health Survey 36, SF-36) associated with diabetes mellitus (DM) and the nutritional status (Nutritional Risk Screening 2002, NRS). Within our hospitalised group of trauma patients, the prevalence of diabetes mellitus was 12.4% and the risk for malnutrition (NRS ≥ 3) was 18.3%, which is much higher than in the normal population (DM 7.2%). Patients suffering from diabetes mellitus had significantly more complications than patients without diabetes mellitus. Similar results were found when comparing patients with a risk of malnutrition to the patients without. Furthermore, patients with DM evaluate their subjective quality of life lower than do patients without DM in the most domains of the SF-36, especially in the subjective-physical domains, while patients with NRS ≥ 3 assess their quality of life as being lower than do patients without a risk of malnutrition in all domains of the SF-36 (physical and mental). Additionally, we showed that reduced nutritional status has a greater influence on the decline in quality of life than did diabetes mellitus. Both diabetes mellitus and malnutrition seems to influence the subjective quality of life and the complication rate of hospitalised trauma patients. A nationwide data collection and targeted interventions within the frame of interdisciplinary cooperation are necessary. In this way, the postoperative complication rate as well as associated higher treatment costs could be reduced.
30064148	Multiple myeloma is a haematological blood cancer in elderly patients, in which neoplastic cell populations cause osteolytic destruction in the bone skeleton. More than 50% of all patients sustain pathological fractures during the course of their disease. Of all malignant lesions of the spine, multiple myeloma is the most frequent spinal tumour and accounts for approximately 15% of all cases. 8 - 10% of the patients develop neurological deficits. In addition to systemic antineoplastic therapy, surgical treatment is often required in order to reconstruct and stabilise bone defects associated with multiple myeloma, as well as to address tumour-related complications. A comprehensive literature search was performed in PubMed using the keywords 'multiple myeloma' and 'surgery' or 'fracture'. This served to evaluate the available primary and secondary literature on the current status of the surgical therapy of multiple myeloma. Systematic reviews, meta-analyses and clinical studies and international recommendations for therapy were included - from 1975 until the spring of 2018. Stabilising surgery is essential in order to retain and restore function and mobility in bone sections affected by myeloma and for tumour-related osseous defects due to pathological fracture or instability. Absolute and relative indications for surgical treatment are distinguished and are based on the extent and localisation of bone lesions, manifest fractures, accompanying side effects and complications such as neurological deficits and bone pain that is intractable to conservative treatment. The range of options in surgical treatment of myeloma-related bone damage within the upper and lower extremities ranges from hybrid stabilisation procedures combining bone cement and various implants, to conventional and modular tumour prostheses systems. In spinal surgery, minimally invasive procedures such as kyphoplasty or vertebroplasty, as well as selective decompressive operations, dorsal spinal fusion and vertebral replacement are performed in cases of osseous defects and related fractures or instabilities. The surgical treatment and time of operation is determined by the general individual risk profile and prognosis of the patient with multiple myeloma. The surgical approach should have the objective of a final and load stable solution for the patient, which takes into account the frequent long-term course of the disease. Radiotherapy is often recommended after surgery. In therapy of multiple myeloma, surgical treatment is often required in order to reduce distress and retain the function and flexibility of myeloma affected bone sections and the mobility and quality of life of the cancer patient. The range of surgical strategies is complex and demanding.
30064152	The desire to retain control over one's life until the end has become highly important in our society. Women and men of different ages and of diverse social, cultural, and educational backgrounds increasingly decide in advance about prospective medical treatment (Advance Care Planning, ACP). Identification and analysis of literature on advance care planning behavior of men and women in Germany. The focus is on gender-specific differences. Systematic review of empirical studies with gender-specific data on advance care planning behavior in Germany. In-depth analysis of 21 of the 479 retrieved articles. The analysis reveals that Advance Care Planning behavior is influenced by interacting factors such as gender, age, cultural and ethnic background, religion, and education. Gender alone does not explain the prevalence of ACP behavior. This prima facie negative result is partly due to the study designs. Heterogeneous data and a lack of gender sensitivity leave the question concerning the relationships between ACP behavior and gender mostly unanswered. The analyzed studies reduce gender to a dualistic classification system, dismiss individual role models and positions and also neglect geographic and cultural contexts. There is a need for studies sensitive to gender and culture.
30064153	More than 90 % of all patients with testicular germ cell tumours can be cured effectively. The mainstay of treatment is chemotherapy with cisplatin, etoposide and bleomycin (PEB). This regimen is usually well tolerated and does not lead to serious adverse events. Cardiovascular complications are encountered very rarely, but have gained increasing attention in recent years.  A 33-year-old man with a testicular seminoma, clinical stage 2b, was subjected to PEB chemotherapy. At the end of the first treatment course, he had an acute ST-elevation myocardial infarction. Coronary angiography revealed a circumscribed stenosis of the left circumflex branch of the left coronary artery with intima dissection and thrombotic deposits. No atherosclerotic changes were found. Management consisted of placement of a drug-eluting coronary stent. Chemotherapy was discontinued and the seminoma treatment completed by radiotherapy with 30 Gy applied to the retroperitoneal mass and a paraaortic template. Complete remission was achieved. 6 months thereafter, the patient was doing well and was disease-free.  About 0.3 % of all testis cancer patients undergoing cisplatin-based chemotherapy develop cardiovascular complications. Cisplatin-related endothelial damage with secondary thrombotic clotting is assumed to be etiologic in these cases. As there is little comorbidity, the prognostic outlook is favourable in most cases. Caregivers in charge of testis cancer management should be vigilant regarding cardiovascular complications to ensure immediate diagnostic and therapeutic measures in incident cases.
30068014	Prophylactic total gastrectomy is the treatment of choice in patients with germline mutation in the CDH1 gene and therefore high risk for hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC). Minimally invasive techniques have been established in recent years for treatment of gastric cancer. We report findings with 12 patients with proven CDH1 mutation who underwent multidisciplinary treatment between 2013 and 3/2018 in our centre for hereditary tumour diseases, followed by prophylactic total gastrectomy in our department. Data were collected in a prospective hereditary tumour database. Open prophylactic total gastrectomy was performed in 5 patients (between 2013 and 2015) and minimally invasive prospective gastrectomy in 7 patients (between 2015 and 2018). The median age of all patients (7 women and 5 men) was 42 (range: 19 - 60) years. The mean operation time was 291 ± 72 minutes (open: 269 ± 70; minimally invasive: 307 ± 75). Perioperative 60-day mortality and anastomotic leakage rate were 0%. In 3 patients, postoperative complications occurred (according to the Clavien-Dindo classification: one each of grades II, IIIa and IVb, respectively), and therefore 25% morbidity. The average postoperative hospital stay was 14.5 ± 6.2 days (open: 16.2 ± 7.9; minimally invasive: 13.3 ± 5.0). In 10 of 12 patients (83%), foci of intramucosal signet ring cell carcinomas were found in the gastric specimen, in 9 patients with multifocal dissemination. There were no cases with advanced carcinomas (≥ pT1b) or lymph node metastases. Patients with suspected high risk for hereditary diffuse gastric cancer should be cared for in a multidisciplinary centre for hereditary tumour diseases. Laparoscopic total gastrectomy is a safe and feasible risk-reducing procedure for patients with CDH1 germline mutation. Therefore, in the absence of contraindications and with available surgical expertise, the minimally invasive operation should be the standard procedure for these patients.
30068015	Complications following the creation of permanent intestinal ostomies are common and lead to serious problems in the stoma care of affected patients. The aim of this prospective, single-centre follow-up study was to record the rate of late complications in our own patient group and to identify potential risk factors. All patients who received a permanent intestinal ostomy in our clinic within the period 2006 - 2016 were included in the study. 50 patients gave their informed consent and participated in our follow-up (14 female [28%], 36 male [72%]). The analysis of stoma-associated complications was performed by review of medical records and a systematic follow-up (standardised questionnaire, clinical examination, and ultrasound of the abdominal wall). Indications included malignancy (n = 27; 54%), anastomotic leakage (n = 10; 20%), acute diverticulitis (n = 7; 14%), IBD (n = 5; 10%) and rarer indications. The top 3 late complications were peristomal skin irritation (n = 25, 50%), parastomal hernia (n = 14; 28%) and prolapse (n = 9; 18%). Acute diverticulitis resulted in increased stomal retraction (p = 0.012). Double-barreled stomata were associated with increased herniation rates (p = 0.044) and prolapse (p = 0.047). Ileostomies were associated with peristomal skin irritation (p = 0.021). Age, sex or emergency stoma creation did not constitute independent risk factors for the development of late complications in our group of patients. Professional pre- and postoperative stoma therapy and care includes preoperative marking of a stoma site and structured stoma-specific follow-up by stoma therapists, surgeons and general practitioners, as well as stringent and early treatment of structural complications. This can prevent and mitigate late complications of permanent intestinal stomata. Interestingly, stoma placement was not an independent risk factor for late complications in an emergency situation.
32447431	Critical incidents in hospitals can often be predicted hours before the event and can mostly be detected earlier and presumably avoided. Quality management programs from US hospitals to reduce deaths following a severe postoperative complication (failure to rescue, FTR), have in this form not yet become established in Germany. A sensitive score-based early warning system for looming complications is decisive for successful in-hospital emergency management. In addition to measurement rounds where the frequency is adapted to the severity, this includes effective communication of the results to the ward physician, who in the best case scenario solves the problem alone. If the deployment of a medical rapid response emergency team (MET) is necessary, there must be clear chain of alarm pathways and the personnel on the ward must be able to take initial bridging action until the MET arrives. The MET provides 24/7 emergency and intensive medical expertise for peripheral wards and must be familiar with the location, well-equipped and trained. Communication skills are particularly required not only to be able to handle the immediate emergency situation but also to organize the downstream diagnostics and escalation of treatment; however, the MET is only one of the links in the in-hospital rescue chain, which can only improve the patient outcome when alerted in a timely manner. Feedback systems, such as participation in the German Resuscitation Registry, allow reflection of one's own performance in a national comparison. The chances offered by a MET will only be fully realized when it is integrated into an in-hospital emergency concept and this determines the added value for patient safety.
32450561	Therapy in whole medical systems involves a large number of medicinal products. One source of knowledge of clinical properties of such products is the experience of therapy providers. A systematic approach to documentation, assessment, and aggregation of physicians' experiences with anthroposophic medicinal products (AMPs) has been developed: the Vademecum of Anthroposophic Medicines. The Vademecum contains structured information on AMPs, including therapeutic rationale, indications, and therapy recommendations. The information is based on a 17-item questionnaire of physicians' therapy experiences, which is peer-reviewed by an interdisciplinary editorial board. We conducted a descriptive analysis of the Vademecum, 4th edition. The Vademecum comprised 799 different AMPs, used for 1,773 indications, based on 2,543 questionnaires submitted by 274 physicians from 19 countries. The 799 AMPs comprised 52.6% of all AMPs marketed in Germany in 2015-2016. The 1,773 indications corresponded to 544 different ICD-10 three-digit codes, amounting to 29.3% (n = 544/1,854) of all three-digit codes. A total of 30.6% (n = 542/1,773) of indications were supported by ≥2 questionnaires. The current Vade-mecum covers more than half of all AMPs, used for more than one fourth of all ICD-10 three-digit codes. The Vademecum approach may be relevant for medicinal products from other whole medical systems.
32450574	There are a few studies in the literature investigating the effect of preoperative dutasteride use on bleeding in open simple prostatectomy. We aimed to evaluate the effect of preoperative dutasteride use on perioperative bleeding during open simple prostatectomy. We retrospectively analyzed the medical records of all patients who underwent transvesical open prostatectomy due to benign prostatic hyperplasia in our institution between 2008 and 2018. Patients were divided into 2 groups regarding the use of dutasteride prior to surgery as group 1 = received dutasteride during at least six weeks prior to surgery; group 2 = dutasteride naive. A total of 167 patients who met the inclusion criteria were included in the study. The mean operative time was 86.5±18.7 min while the estimated blood loss was 640.7±55.7 ml. There was no statistically significant difference in operative time, estimated blood loss, hemoglobin, and hematocrit decrease among the two groups. We were not able to find an advantage of pre-operative dutasteride use in terms of perioperative bleeding in open simple prostatectomy performed for benign prostatic hyperplasia.
32450579	Multifocal intraocular lenses (MIOLs) may bring independence from glasses. In practice the question often arises as to which patient would be suitable for the implantation of MIOLs. Surgeons are hesitant to implant MIOLs in patients with macular or retinal pathologies, mostly due to a fear that the multifocality of the implanted IOL might increase patients' existing visual handicap. In this study we use virtual implantation to determine how various multifocal intraocular lens designs impact visual performance in the presence of macular pathologies. 17 pseudophakic normal eyes (group 1) and 13 pseudophakic eyes with retinal maculopathologies (group 2) and lower visual acuity were included in this study. We analysed best-corrected distance visual acuity (BCDVA), near- and distance-corrected near visual acuity (DCNVA) and contrast sensitivity (CS) while the patients were looking through the VirtIOL optical simulator to virtually experience vision through implanted intraocular lenses (IOL). Three different IOL types: aspheric monofocal, EDOF (extended depth of focus) and diffractive trifocal were tested. Comparisons were made between the different IOL types and between groups 1 and 2. Group 2 had lower visual acuity and also lower CS than group 1. The benefit from the multifocal IOLs was seen as a significantly increased DCNVA over the monofocal IOL. This was demonstrated in both groups: increases of 0.29 logMAR and 0.39 logMAR in DCNVA with EDOF- and trifocal IOL in group 1, respectively, and increases of 0.17 logMAR and 0.25 logMAR in DCNVA in group 2, respectively. However, at lower spatial frequencies of 3 cpd, CS was reduced in both groups compared to monofocal IOL. For the visual functions tested here, MIOLs are a viable option for patients with maculoretinal pathologies or previous retinal surgery to support their wish for independence from glasses. Although their visual performance is limited, they can still benefit from MIOLs with improved reading performance without near addition.
32450585	Modern, individualised therapies can improve the survival of patients with colorectal cancer. However, not all patients are referred for treatment to a certified colorectal cancer centre, where a tumor board supports the implementation of their therapy in accordance to guidelines. This study examines the feasibility and demand of a structured, online-based, qualified second opinion for patients with colorectal cancer.  A 15-month pilot study between 2009 and 2011, offered patients with colorectal cancer to obtain a qualified second opinion of a tumour board based on an electronic patient record completed online with the assistance of a case manager. Life-satisfaction levels and quality of life (EORCT QLQ-C30) of the participants has been monitored for a year.  In 95 % of the cases, a complete electronic patient record and a second opinion could be generated. Less than half of the participants received their first therapy recommendation from a clinic with a tumour board. The second opinion confirmed the initial medical opinion in 40 % of the cases - 33 % showed a partial and 27 % showed a significant deviation. In case of a deviation, the implementation of the second opinion improved the patients' quality of life.  Generating an online-based, qualified second opinion by an interdisciplinary tumour board is technically and logistically well feasible. The online-based second opinion could significantly improve the quality of treatment for patients with colorectal cancer in the future and thus improve their quality of life.
32451566	Fatigue resulting from cancer and its treatment can lead to a reduction in quality of life. The frequency and intensity of fatigue syndrome after cancer therapy in the ENT field are largely unknown. Therefore, during follow-up consultations, the authors conducted a random survey with the help of the Multidimensional Fatigue Inventory (MFI 20). During aftercare consultations, 66 patients were interviewed (average age 63 years, 21 women). All patients had received radiotherapy an average of 2 years previously (range 1-4 years). All respondents were in full remission at the time of the survey. According to recommendations, evaluation of the MFI-20 was carried out in 5 subgroups: general fatigue, physical fatigue, reduced activity, reduced motivation, and mental fatigue. For comparison with standard values, respondents were grouped by age into under and over 60 years and were also evaluated by gender. Regardless of gender, our patients reported clearly elevated scores in all subgroups. Particularly participants aged under 60 years reported very high scores. The clarity of the results surprised the authors. Fatigue represents a very profound and prolonged impairment for the patients of our study. Since fatigue can still be present a long time after completion of treatment, patients should be asked about it specifically using a standardized inventory during follow-up. In order to cope with fatigue syndrome, specific therapeutic recommendations aimed at activation, such as regular physical activity, nutritional advice, and complementary measures, can be made.
32451594	In 1986, the Ottawa charter marked a paradigm shift for public health, putting the focus on strengthening community action and on creating supportive environments for health. A key to this is 'capacity building' (CB), which we understand as the development and sustainable implementation of structural capacities, e.g. coordinated data collection, collaboration processes across sectors and reliable provision of basic resources in all areas of local health promotion.Many efforts and three and a half decades later we still envisage infrastructure deficits, scattered public health landscapes and restraints to intersectoral cooperation much too often. While agreement on the theoretical insights on what is needed appears to be broad, translating these insights into practice remains a challenge. In this situation, digital public health (DPH) can contribute to overcoming barriers and making knowledge for action more visible and more accessible. With DPH, data can be integrated, structured and disseminated in novel ways.We discuss why CB at the local level could benefit from technological advances and what DPH might do for the provision of information services on public health capacity. Our focus is on the web-based, interactive representation of public health data for use in information, governance or benchmarking processes. As an example from public health practice, the Finnish tool TEAviisari (National Institute for Health and Welfare, Finland) is presented.The 2020 EU Council Presidency of Germany - with the topics of digitalisation and the common European health data space - offers opportunities to decisively advance the development of CB in health promotion in this country.
34061213	Pediatric liver tumors are relatively rare, but thorough knowledge of their imaging features is still important. Frequency and imaging features of benign and malignant liver masses during childhood and adolescence. Discussion of relevant original articles, review manuscripts and expert recommendations concerning imaging of childhood liver tumors. The most common malignant tumors of the liver are hepatoblastoma, which usually occur in younger children, as well as in some regions hepatocellular carcinoma. In contrast to most benign masses, such as focal nodular hyperplasia, simple cysts or fatty liver infiltrations, their imaging morphology is not very characteristic. Radiologically, sonography and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are used for assessment. Both methods benefit from intravenous contrast agent administration. Childhood liver tumors show a broad spectrum of morphological manifestations. Some entities can be characterized using standard imaging, some require multimodal imaging or histological assessment. In addition to morphological imaging criteria, age and the medical history as well as laboratory data play an important role in establishing the correct diagnosis.
34061214	Imaging plays a major role to differentiate interstitial edematous from necrotic pancreatitis and to describe relevant local complications for proper patient management and decision-making in acute pancreatitis. The revised Atlanta classification 2012 of acute pancreatitis divides patients into mild, moderately severe and severe groups. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are well established for diagnosis and follow-up of acute pancreatitis and its complications METHODOLOGICAL INNOVATIONS AND ASSESSMENT: Based on the revised Atlanta classification, CT and MRI allow for adequate categorization of interstitial edematous and necrotic pancreatitis. Imaging and standardized reporting nomenclature enable confident differentiation of early and late complications in acute pancreatitis. The aim of this review article is to present an image-rich overview of different morphologic characteristics of acute pancreatitis and associated local complications by CT or MRI using case examples.
34061221	In implant surgery for erectile dysfunction and urinary incontinence, adequate patient selection is essential for postoperative therapy success. Several scientific studies report patient satisfaction rates for penile implants and artificial urinary sphincter implantation of over 90%. Nevertheless, studies also report, that between 5 and 30% of the patients are not satisfied with the result of their operation. Sufficient patient information and consent prior surgical procedure in urological prosthetics are a key determinant for later patient satisfaction and therapy success. Diligent assessment of realistic expectations, possible complications, and risks must be made. Unrealistic and exaggerated expectations need to be met and discussed with the patient. Therefore adequate physician-patient communication is essential. Especially in the case of surgical revision or for patients with risk factors, the probability of complications is higher and may significantly increase later dissatisfaction. Also, the involvement of the partner plays a major role in later patient satisfaction in urological implant surgery. Finally, there is a group of patients for which the risk of later dissatisfaction is particularly high. These are patients with compulsive/obsessive behavior, unrealistic expectations, patients after revision surgery, self-entitled patients, as well as those patients who deny the extent of their illness, visit multiple surgeons (surgeon hopping) or have psychiatric illnesses. These patients are referred to with the acronym 'CURSED' patients.
34061224	Aniseikonia as one of the major risk factors for asthenopic problems is mostly overlooked in modern cataract surgery. The purpose of this study was to develop a simple calculation scheme for clinicians to predict the object to image magnification in a pseudophakic eye with biometric data. The calculation scheme for object to image magnification in the pseudophakic eye is based on a vergence calculation of the lens power with theoretical optical formulae. From the biometric data, which are typically derived from both eyes during lens power calculation, the vergences in front of and behind the 3 or 4 refractive surfaces of the pseudophakic eye model are used to predict the magnification for objects at infinity or objects located at a finite measurement distance (e.g. 5 m). With a formula-based lens power calculation a pseudophakic eye model is set up with 3 or 4 refractive surfaces (postoperative spectacle refraction; thick cornea described by anterior surface or thick cornea characterized by anterior and posterior surfaces; intraocular lens). The vergence in front of and behind each refractive surface is derived by means of linear Gaussian optics. The quotient of the product of all vergences in front of the surfaces and the product of all vergences behind the respective surfaces describes the object to image magnification of the eye. A comparison of the object to image magnification of both eyes yields the retinal image size disparity or aniseikonia. This calculation strategy is shown in a step-by-step approach exemplarily for the Haigis and Hoffer‑Q formulae (3 surfaces) and the Castrop formula (4 surfaces). If during planning and lens power calculation biometry is performed for both eyes, ocular magnification of both eyes can be easily derived with this calculation scheme and aniseikonia can be extracted from a comparison of magnification of both eyes. Such a simple prediction should be established as a standard for precataract biometry and lens power calculation for early detection and avoidance of asthenopic complaints after cataract surgery.
34061241	The treatment of inguinal hernias with open and minimally invasive procedures has reached a high standard in terms of outcome over the past 30 years. However, there is still need for further improvement, mainly in terms of reduction of postoperative seroma, chronic pain, and recurrence. This video article presents the endoscopic anatomy of the groin with regard to robotic transabdominal preperitoneal patch plasty (r‑TAPP) and illustrates the surgical steps of r‑TAPP with respective video sequences. The results of a cohort study of 302 consecutive hernias operated by r‑TAPP are presented and discussed in light of the added value of the robotic technique, including advantages for surgical training. r‑TAPP is the natural evolution of conventional TAPP and has the potential to become a new standard as equipment availability increases and material costs decrease. Future studies will also have to refine the multifaceted added value of r‑TAPP with new parameters.
34062565	Osteoprotective medications are a key element not only in the management of bone metastases of castration-resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC) but also of hormone-sensitive prostate cancer (mHSPC). Additionally, osteoprotective drugs can prevent androgen deprivation-induced bone loss. The aim of this study was to illustrate the practice pattern of osteoprotection for prostate cancer patients in Germany. We designed an online survey consisting of 16 questions. The survey was sent to the nation-wide working groups 'Oncology' and 'Uro-Oncology' as well as to colleagues from the departments of urology of University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein (Campus Lübeck), Academic Hospital Brunswick and Technical University of Munich. Furthermore, we developed flow charts for decision guidance for osteoprotection within the different stages of prostate cancer. Our analysis demonstrates a routine use of osteoprotection in the management of bone metastases of mCRPC. In contrast, osteoprotective medications are less often used for the treatment of bone metastases of mHSPC and for the prevention of androgen deprivation-induced bone loss. Our flow charts depict the different dosages and intervals for the administration of osteoprotective drugs in the different stages of prostate cancer. Osteoprotection is not only confined to mCRPC with bone metastases. It plays a crucial role in the management of all stages of metastatic prostate cancer.
34062582	The use of combined hormonal contraceptives (CHC) is a well-established risk factor for venous thromboembolism (VTE). The VTE risk depends on the specific combination of oestrogen and gestagen components. Progestin-only contraceptives with the exception of depot medroxyprogesterone acetate are not associated with a significant VTE risk and can therefore be offered to women with known thrombophilia or a prior VTE. The recent German S3 guideline 'Contraception' advises to carefully assess individual VTE risk factors before prescribing CHC. According to recent data there is no evidence suggesting that VTE risk is increased during oral anticoagulation. To reduce the risk of vaginal bleeding complication and the risk of unplanned pregnancy, the use of CHC can be continued under anticoagulation treatment provided that the patient is switched to an oestrogen-free contraception no later than six weeks before the end of anticoagulation. The risk of recurrence is low in women with hormone-associated VTE. Anticoagulation is therefore in general discontinued after 3-6 months. Thromboprophylaxis with low molecular heparin is recommended for women with prior hormone-associated VTE during pregnancy and the postpartum period.
34062583	With the increasing prevalence of continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) systems, time in range (TIR) is gaining importance as a parameter for optimization of glycemic control in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus. Recent studies showed improved prevention of cardiovascular events and pregnancy complications in patients with optimized TIR. In addition to TIR, it is recommended to consider Time below Range (TBR) as well to include an assessment of hypoglycemia. Hypoglycemia remains a clinically relevant complication of therapy for type 1 diabetes mellitus. With the approval of nasal glucagon, there is now an alternative to traditional injections as an easy-to-use emergency therapy. With the development of the glucagon analogue Dasiglucagon, which is stable in the liquid state, a classic emergency pen with a ready-to-use solution will also potentially be available in the near future. The new fast-acting insulin aspart (FIASP) offers new opportunities for blood glucose optimization in type 1 diabetes patients. Furthermore, the first hybrid closed-loop system for the treatment of type 1 diabetes mellitus was approved in Germany in 2019. This system automatically adjusts the basal rate based to blood glucose levels measured by CGM. When used adequately, a hybrid closed-loop system allows for improved glycemic control, particularly of nocturnal blood glucose. Since 2019, the SGLT-2 inhibitor dapagliflozin and the combined SGLT-1/2 inhibitor sotagliflozin have been approved for the therapy of inadequately controlled type 1 diabetics with a BMI above 27 kg/m² and no elevated risk of diabetic ketoacidosis. The most relevant side effect is atypical normoglycemic ketoacidosis, which is why initial risk assessment and adequate training of the patient to perform and interpret ketone body and pH measurements during therapy are of central importance.
34062584	Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) is a genetic disorder arising due to mutation in alpha1-antitrypsin (AAT). AAT mutations interfere with the AAT production/secretion, cause decreased AAT serum levels and accumulation of AAT in the liver. The excess AAT leads to a proteotoxic liver disease, while the lack of AAT in systemic circulation predisposes to lung injury. While AATD related lung disease is well understood, liver disease needs further awareness. Non-invasive liver stiffness measurement constitutes a useful method to estimate the extent of liver fibrosis. Significant liver fibrosis occurs in 20-35 % of individuals with the classic, severe genotype Pi*ZZ. Genotype Pi*SZ, also known as the compound heterozygous form, confers an increased risk of both liver fibrosis and liver neoplasia. Even the heterozygous genotype Pi*MZ increases the odds of fibrosis in presence of further risk factors such as obesity, male sex, metabolic syndrome and diabetes mellitus. In individuals with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease or alcohol misuse it promotes the development of liver cirrhosis. While no drug treatment exists for AATD-related liver disease, there are several compounds in clinical phase II/III-trials. These either silence the AAT production via siRNA or facilitate the secretion of AAT from the liver due to an improved folding.
34062585	Treating sleep disorders is a challenge in individuals with dementia. A precondition for treatment success is thorough diagnostics of sleep disorders. Sleep diaries and observational questionnairs represent important diagnostic tools. In addition to general treatment strategies including optimal treatment of comorbidities, behavioral therapy is a main intervention. Drugs for the treatment of a sleep disorder should only be prescribed with a clear indication and prolongation of prescription should regularly be checked. The active search for and the treatment of sleep disorders should always be performed in individuals with dementia.
34062586	The risk of malignant lymphomas is markedly increased in HIV-infected persons even in the era of effective combination antiretroviral therapy. Major risk factors are the depth of CD4-cell nadir and HIV viremia. R-CHOP remains treatment of choice for diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. In HIV-Burkitt lymphoma CODOX-M/IVAC proved superior to EPOCH in a large retrospective study. Standard treatment for plasmablastic or primary effusion lymphoma has not yet been defined. Favourable results have been reported with a stage adapted treatment for HIV-Hodgkin lymphoma. Patients with relapsed/refractory HIV-lymphoma should undergo autologous stem cell transplantation if indicated. Successful anti-CD19 CAR T-cell therapy was also reported in HIV-infected patients with refractory B-cell lymphoma.
34062587	Lyme borreliosis is a tick-borne infectious disease caused by the spirochete bacterium Borrelia burgdorferi sensu lato. Lyme borreliosis is the most frequent zoonosis in Germany.Most cases show dermatological manifestations, like erythema migrans, followed by infections of the nervous system. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis should be performed if Lyme neuroborreliosis is suspected. Cell-based assays (like LTT or ELISPOT) should not be used when investigating Lyme disease.A recent randomized controlled trial showed a similar effect of doxycycline compared to betalactam-antibiotics regarding neurological symptoms in Lyme neuroborreliosis. This corroborates current German guideline recommendations.The prognosis of Lyme disease after antibiotic treatment is usually favorable. Frequency of fatigue, depression, impairments in quality of life and cognitive impairment are similar in patients after treatment of Lyme neuroborreliosis when compared to the general population.
34062588	Cardiac arrest is one of the most dramatic medical emergencies. The occurence of cardiac arrest in hospitalized patients, the so called in-hospital cardiac arrest, is common and associated with high mortality. However, in-hospital cardiac arrest has received quite little attention compared to cardiac arrest occuring outside the hospital. The present article reviews the recent literature of in-hospital cardiac arrest and outlines differences in characteristics and outcome compared to out of hospital cardiac arrest. Moreover, current literature regarding occurence and outcome of in-hospital cardiac arrest in hospitalized patients with COVID-19 is concisely summarized.
34062589	Psychocardiological research has contributed a better understanding of mental health, psychosocial factors and quality of life of in patients with cardiovascular diseases. In this update of psychocardiology in 2021, stressful experiences in childhood and adolescence are found to increase the risk of type II diabetes mellitus, coronary heart disease and stroke along the life course. Higher level of optimism, sense of purpose, and mindfulness can be possible protective factors for cardiovascular health. Summarizing the update of psychocardiological interventions, the effectiveness of team-based treatment ('blended collaborative care') in secondary prevention is currently being tested in Germany in the randomized, controlled TEACH multicenter trial of patients with coronary heart disease and distress. Interventions such as positive psychology and mindfulness training can lead to a significant reduction in anxiety, stress and depression in heart patients.
34062590	Resistant hypertension (RH) is defined in patients who do not meet their blood pressure targets despite the daily intake of three antihypertensive drugs in maximally tolerated dosages. This triple treatment should comprise (1) an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACE-I) or angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB), (2) a calcium channel blocker and (3) a diuretic. RH should also be diagnosed in patients on four or more antihypertensive drug classes. Of note, the diagnosis of RH requires the exclusion of non-adherence, 'white coat effect', and incorrect BP-measurement.After diagnosing RH, it is important to recommend lifestyle interventions (e. g. low dietary salt intake, regular physical activity), to pause BP-elevating substances, and to consider the presence of secondary hypertension.Such secondary forms of hypertension primarily include endocrine disorders and renal disease (both acute kidney injury and chronic kidney disease). The leading endocrine cause is primary hyperaldosteronism, the management of which was highlighted in a recent guideline. Other endocrine causes - such as phaeochromocytoma or hypercortisolism - are much less frequent. In contrast, sleep apnoea disorders are now mostly considered as a comorbidity rather than as a cause of secondary hypertension.Treatment options for RH include lifestyle optimisation and escalation of antihypertensive medication. In most patients on triple treatment (ACE-I or ARB plus calcium channel blocker plus diuretic), mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (MRA) should be the next treatment choice. As MRA may be associated with hyperkalemia (particularly in patients with chronic kidney disease), the concurrent use of potassium-lowering agents such as patiromer may allow a safe long-term treatment. In contrast, novel interventional treatment options in RH such as renal denervation are still controversially discussed.
34062591	In hospital, effective smoking cessation can be organized through counselling, pharmacological aids and, above all, continuous care in outpatient structures following discharge. Pharmacological treatment has proven to be effective and safe with nicotine replacement therapy as well as varenicline. Counselling plus pharmacotherapy is more effective in combination than either therapy is on its own. To better implement structures medical societies in Germany are seeking adequate funding e. g. in the DRG system for hospitalised patients.There are obvious and relevant benefits in smoking cessation. Not only for the main tobacco-related diseases such as coronary heart disease or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), positive effects of quitting on morbidity and mortality have been confirmed by high-quality meta-analyses. Furthermore, quality of life is increasing following cessation. Presently, smoking is found to be a significant risk factor for severe disease and mortality following coronavirus infection.Do e-cigarettes offer an alternative in smoking cessation? No. Animal and human data are suggesting toxic effects especially following longer use. The long-term effectiveness of e-cigarettes in tobacco cessation is still uncertain and epidemiologic data clearly point toward ineffectiveness. Furthermore, dual use with potentiation of the toxic effects is common. Therefore, e-cigarettes cannot be recommended for tobacco cessation.
34062592	Lung involvement is one of the most frequent organ manifestation in rheumatic diseases (CTD-ILD). Especially patients with rheumatoid arthritis, systemic sclerosis, and idiopathic inflammatory myopathies are affected. Interstitial lung diseases (ILD) are still associated with significant morbidity and mortality. The last years have brought advances in management and treatment of ILDs. Methotrexate is probably not a significant cause of lung disease in rheumatoid arthritis but might even delay the presentation of interstitial lung disease (ILD). Tocilizumab could be a treatment option in SSc-ILD, despite the limitations of the current studies. For Systemic Sclerosis-ILD (SSc-ILD) and progressive fibrosing ILD, antifibrotic therapy with nintedanib is now approved.
34062594	In a 67-year-old female patient with upper abdominal pain, computed tomography showed a partly calcified swelling of the pancreatic head and wall thickening of the duodenum. Inpatient physical examination findings were normal. Laboratory showed increased pancreatic enzymes (amylase 210 U/l [Standard range: 28-100 U/l], lipase 2115 U/l [Standard range: 23-300 U/l]) and inflammation values (CRP 11.7 mg/l [Standard range: < 5.0 mg/l]), otherwise largely normal laboratory parameters. In the esophago-gastro-duodenoscopy, biopsy of swollen, partly stenosing mucous membrane areas in the duodenum was performed. Histology revealed partial erosive duodenitis, no evidence of a malignant tumor. If chronic calcifying pancreatitis was suspected, a sonographically guided percutaneous biopsy of the pancreatic head was performed to exclude a tumor. Post-biopsy, the patient developed abdominal pain and temporary circulatory instability with nausea/vomiting and a drop in Hb to 7.5 g/dl [Standard range: 12.3-15.3 g/dl]. The sonographic suspicion of a retroperitoneal hematoma was confirmed by computed tomography. The cause was a haemorrhage from a renal artery perforation on the right side, which could be stopped by immediate angiographic intervention with a covered stent. After percutaneous biopsy, vascular perforation must always be considered. Computed tomography provides a reliable and quick diagnosis. Minimally invasive percutaneous insertion of a covered stent is the therapy of choice in the case of a renal artery accessible to stents.
34076782	Nonopioid analgesics are frequently used for perioperative analgesia; however, insufficient research is available on several practical issues. Often hospitals have no strategy for how to proceed, e.g., for informing patients or for the timing of perioperative administration of nonopioid analgesics. An expert panel representing the German national societies of pain, anaesthesiology and intensive care medicine and surgery developed recommendations for the perioperative use of nonopioid analgesics within a formal, structured consensus process. The panel agreed that nonopioid analgesics shall be part of a multimodal analgesia concept and that patients have to be informed preoperatively about possible complications and alternative treatment options. Patients' history of pain and analgesic intake shall be evaluated. Patients at risk of severe postoperative pain and possible chronification of postsurgical pain shall be identified. Depending on the duration of surgery, nonopioid analgesics can already be administered preoperatively or intraoperatively so that plasma concentrations are sufficient after emergence from anesthesia. Nonopioid analgesics or combinations of analgesics shall be administered for a limited time only. An interdisciplinary written standard of care, comprising the nonopioid analgesic of choice, possible alternatives, adequate dosing and timing of administration as well as surgery-specific policies, have to be agreed upon by all departments involved. At discharge, the patient's physician shall be informed of analgesics given and those necessary after discharge. Patients shall be informed of possible side effects and symptoms and timely discontinuation of analgesic drugs. The use of nonopioid analgesics as part of a perioperative multimodal concept should be approved and established as an interdisciplinary and interprofessional concept for the adequate treatment of postoperative pain.
34076783	Chronic pain is a worldwide problem of healthcare along with social and economic factors. The Center for Pain Medicine (CPM) Nottwil offers individualized, interdisciplinary, multimodal pain rehabilitation based on the biopsychosocial approach. The aim of this study was to obtain a real-life analysis of chronic pain patients who were treated at the CPM Nottwil, to understand how they were treated and to analyze the long-term effects of the treatment. In a retrospective cohort study data of all patients who underwent a first medical examination at the CPM Nottwil in 2011 were included in the study. The effectiveness of the treatment was analyzed in a 3-year follow-up measurement. The main outcome was the general well-being of the patient. In 2011, 628 chronic pain patients underwent a first medical examination at the CPM Nottwil. They showed low values in the dimension of general well-being and a high impairment due to severely limiting pain intensity. Although the power analysis suggested a sample size of 170 patients for the follow-up measurement, only 46 participants (responders) were included in the final analysis. Baseline characteristics between responders and non-responders of the follow-up-group showed statistically significant differences for health-related quality of life (SF-12) and the anxiety and depression scale (HADS), but not for other sample characteristics. Improvement from pretreatment to follow-up emerged in the dimension of well-being, physical well-being and pain intensity. At follow-up 30% reported being pain-free. Individualized, interdisciplinary, multimodal and mostly outpatient pain programs are an effective treatment for patients suffering from chronic pain in the long term. For the first time this effect has been proven in a clinically representative cohort. Limitations of this study are low response rates in the follow-up group and differences in baseline characteristics (anxiety, depression and quality of life) between responders and non-responders.
34077947	This study aimed to understand the molecular mechanism underlying the therapeutic effect of Qi Ling (QL) against androgen-independent prostate cancer. The relative expression of TRIM66 in prostate tumor was interrogated by microarray. Real-time polymerase chain reaction and Western blotting were performed to determine the transcript abundances and protein expressions of TRIM66, HP1γ, AR, c-Myc, and GAPDH. Cell proliferation and apoptosis were analyzed by cell counting kit-8 method and flow cytometry. The regulatory action of c-Myc on TRIM66 was interrogated with luciferase reporter plasmid and the direct binding was demonstrated by chromatin immunoprecipitation. The secretory prostate-specific antigen was quantified by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. TRIM66 was aberrantly overexpressed in prostate cancer and associated with unfavorable prognosis. TRIM66/HP1γ/AR was upregulated during the androgen-independent transition in hormone-deprived medium. The TRIM66 level positively linked to cell proliferation and negatively linked to cell apoptosis in androgen-independent prostate cancer cells. QL treatment specifically inhibited c-Myc and therefore directly downregulated TRIM66 via binding to its promoter. Ectopic introduction of TRIM66 significantly reversed the anti-tumor effects of QL against androgen-independent prostate cancer. Our study uncovered the importance of downregulated TRIM66/HP1γ/AR signaling in mediating the anti-tumor properties of QL.
34077975	As a result of digitalization, the internet embodies the essential information medium. Especially, patients with sudden sensorineural hearing loss (SSNHL) require profound education due to unclear scientific evidence. Thus, our study investigated a German-language internet search about SSNHL. The first 30 Google-search results with the term <i>'Hörsturz'</i> (SSNHL in German) were categorized, readability-statistic with different readability-scores (FRES: 0=complex, 100=easy; FKL; SMOG; GFI) calculated, and misinformation documented. A structured content-analysis was performed with the DISCERN-questionnaire (1=low, 5=high quality). Certification of the <i>Health-On-The-Net-Foundation</i> (HON) assessed the abidance of recommended standards. 18 websites (60.0%) accounted for digital media, 7 (23.3%) manufacturers of medical devices, 2 (6.7%) government institutions, and respectively 1 (3.3%) healthcare provider, support-group, and scientific article. Mean word count was 1307.0±840.2, last update 17.1±32.5 months ago, and FRES 36.1±13.9, with the most difficult text by the scientific article (13.7). Mean of DISCERN was 2.2±0.7 with worst rating of manufacturers of medical devices (1.6±0.5). 2 websites (6.7%) were HON-certified, and 14 (46.7%) contained misinformation. Internet-based patient-information should be assessed cautiously due to poor readability, potential conflict of interests, low quality, or wrong information. Hence, healthcare providers and professional associations are urged to provide high-quality patient-information in the internet.
34081156	Resources for the rapid and comprehensive availability of reliable diagnostic tests were an important prerequisite for the detection and management of the pandemic triggered by the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). The capacity for the diagnostic tests had to be rapidly planned and established in early 2020 and had to be constantly expanded. The German healthcare system with dedicated and experienced specialists for laboratory medicine, clinical microbiology, virology and infection epidemiology was well prepared to meet these challenges, both professionally and organizationally. The experiences with the challenges in the first year of the pandemic are presented in this article.
34081174	Description of a reproducible surgical technique for single-bundle anterolateral reconstruction of the posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) based on a septum-sparing approach. This technique is less traumatic than the trans-septum approach. The article illustrates surgical steps to simplify the technical aspects of the procedure. A complete grade III symptomatic tear of the PCL associated with instability and often discomfort (deceleration, stairs) or subsequent gonalgia arising from the medial compartment or patellofemoral joint. Injury of the peripheral joint stabilizers alongside the PCL including the posterolateral corner or a complete medial knee injury. The procedure is indicated in chronic cases, but also in acute cases of posterior instability > 10 mm, if it is an intraligamentous tear with dislocated PCL stumps. Bony avulsions of the PCL suitable for refixation, soft tissue compromise, infection, advanced osteoarthritic disease. After diagnostic arthroscopy of the knee, the ipsilateral semitendinosus and gracilis tendons are harvested and prepared as a 6-strand graft for PCL reconstruction. One high anterolateral viewing portal, one low anterolateral portal, one anteromedial portal, and a posteromedial portal are used for single-bundle reconstruction via one femoral and one tibial bone tunnel and hybrid graft fixation. Weight bearing is restricted to 20 kg for 6 weeks. PCL brace with tibial support for a period of 12 weeks. Flexion is limited to 30° in the first 2 postoperative weeks, then 60° for 2 weeks, and 90° for 2 further weeks. Passive flexion in prone position is performed. Active focused muscle strengthening exercise is begun after 6 weeks postoperatively and participation in competitive sports is not recommended before full muscle strength and coordination is re-established, at the earliest 9-12 months postoperatively. Two isolated and 19 combined PCL injuries were treated. Mean patient age was 27.4 years, and the minimal follow-up was 12 months. On average, we found good clinical outcome with slight degree of posterior laxity (4.1 mm) after PCL reconstruction in comparison with the contralateral knee. No patient showed signs of effusion at follow-up. Range of motion was fully restored in 19 of 21 patients. One patient suffered failure due to persistent posterior instability and persistence of symptoms.
34081175	Anatomical reduction of dislocated fractures using an angle-stable hook plate. Surgical revision of symptomatic nonunions with the aim of bone regeneration. Dislocated fractures of the ulnar styloid process with involvement of the ulnar fovea. Combined fractures with instability of the distal radioulnar joint and symptomatic nonunions. Undisplaced fractures of the ulnar styloid process and asymptomatic nonunions. Dorsoradial access to the distal ulna between the 6th extensor tendon compartment and the tendon of the flexor carpi ulnaris muscle. Exposition of the fracture/nonunion. In case of nonunions, excision and freshening of the fracture ends. Reduction is carried out using the hooks of the plate, if necessary additional attachment of autologous cancellous bone in case of nonunions. Fixation of the plate over the gliding hole and subsequent filling of the angular stable screw holes. Depending on the accompanying injury, immobilization in a forearm plaster splint for 1-2 weeks. Active movement exercises of the fingers from postoperative day 1, if necessary lymph drainage. After bone development, load build-up under ergotherapy guidance. Bony healing was achieved in 100% of our cases. The surgical treatment of symptomatic nonunions as well as dislocated fractures of the ulnar styloid process using an angle-stable hook plate has proven to be successful.
34081176	Treatment of isolated retropatellar cartilage defects using current gel-type regenerative methods requires settlement of the gel to the underlying subchondral bone under gravity; thus, prone positioned arthroscopy is used. Isolated retropatellar contained cartilage defect size >2.5 cm<sup>2</sup>. Age <40 years, epiphyseal closure, cartilage defect grade 3/4 (International Cartilage Repair Society). Cartilage defects at medial or lateral femorotibial compartments, at the trochlea, with degenerative genesis, rheumatoid arthritis, local infection, patellar malalignment, patellofemoral dysplasia, knee instability, knee malalignment >3°, kissing lesions. Two-stage procedure: At initial arthroscopy, chondrocytes were harvested. At the second stage, the patient was positioned prone and the leg with a thigh tourniquet was fixed in a leg holder. Removal of table extension below the knee and support of foot in sling to prevent knee hyperextension. Placement of 2 lateral portals. Lesion visualized and debrided, followed by aspiration of intra-articular fluid. A loop, placed posterior to the patellar ligament using a lasso, was used to suspend a weight to expand the patellofemoral space. The lesion was then dried using a sponge. NOVOCART® Inject (TETEC, Reutlingen, Germany) administered onto the defect. Gel was allowed to solidify for 15 min and operation was completed. Knee locked in extension using a brace for 6 weeks. Continuous passive motion applied and incrementally increased until full range of motion (ROM) at week 6. Weight-bearing as tolerated was allowed with the knee in extension. Routine clinical follow-up after 3, 6 and 12 months. Mean age of the 5 patients was 23 ± 6 (range 14-30) years; mean follow-up time after surgery 28 ± 7 (range 20-40) months. All patients returned to full activity without residual knee ROM restriction. Clinical examination at the latest follow-up revealed a Kujala score of 90 ± 12 points and Lysholm score of 95 ± 5 points. MRI showed filled cartilage defects in all patients. Mocart score was 63 ± 7 points. Cartilage was inhomogeneous and hyperintense at the repaired site. Quantitative measurement of the patella mobility of the operated knee under a translating force of 10 N showed medial and lateral displacements of 21 ± 5 and 15 ± 2 mm and on the healthy side 22 ± 5 and 19 ± 3 mm, respectively.
34081187	The COVID-19 pandemic requires extensive health protection interventions in order to prevent infections in the long-term care setting. These interventions impact residents' lives, including an increase in depressive symptoms and other negative concomitants. The study aimed to explore the experiences and perspectives of nursing home residents with depressive symptoms during the pandemic. In this study nine guideline-based interviews were conducted with residents. These were analyzed using the content-structured content analysis according to Kuckartz. Three main themes were identified: perceptions and emotions related to the pandemic, changes and limitations due to the interventions and wishes in terms of the pandemic. The residents reported both emotional distress and not being afraid of infection and its consequences. In addition, some respondents reported unpleasant restrictions, such as wearing masks. In some cases their usefulness was critically questioned. Furthermore, various wishes of the residents in relation to the pandemic, such as leaving the nursing home, were identified. The study showed complex perceptions, changes, and wishes due to the pandemic and its interventions. Therefore, an individual approach to residents with depressive symptoms is necessary to avoid an increase in mental health problems. Against this background, there is a need for participatory implementation of health protection measures for the particularly vulnerable group of nursing home residents.
34086058	The SARS-CoV‑2 pandemic has affected the health and practice of otorhinolaryngologists (ORLs) for over 1 year. Follow-up data of a national survey with German ORLs were evaluated regarding differences between the two waves of the pandemic. As in the initial survey, German ORLs were addressed via e‑mail through the German Society of ORL, Head and Neck Surgery and the German ENT Association. All ORLs afflicted with SARS-CoV‑2 were invited to participate in a web-based survey. General data on infections and concomitant parameters were evaluated. Since the start of the pandemic, 129 ORLs reported testing positive for SARS-CoV‑2 in Germany. The ORLs infected during the first wave had a relative risk (RR) of 4.07 (95% CI: 3.20; 5.19) of contracting SARS-CoV‑2. During the second wave, the RR decreased to 0.35 (95% CI: 0.28; 0.45). The availability of personal protective equipment (PPE) increased from the first to the second wave along with an increased perception of protection in the professional environment. The source of infection shifted from infections via medical staff during the first wave to patients and household exposure during the second wave. Regular medical practice was resumed by clinicians and general practitioners in the second wave. Nevertheless, a proportionally lower infection rate was observed compared with the German population as a whole. The data reflect a unique long-term survey of ORLs during the pandemic. Differences in the source of infection were seen between the first and second wave, confirming the need for appropriate PPE for medical professionals working in high-risk environments. Further strategies to reduce the risk of infection include consistent testing for SARS-CoV‑2 in healthcare professionals, patients, and the general public as well as vaccination of high-risk medical groups.
34086059	Atrial fibrillation (AF) will become one of the biggest challenges in cardiovascular medicine in the near future. Attempting an improvement in future patient care calls explicitly for the screening of subclinical AF. Digital health solutions implementing communication technologies for the collection and analysis of digitally assessable data will most likely serve this need. Several new rapidly developing methods were introduced in the past decade. Although the vast majority still require scientific validation, the body of evidence is growing and several randomized controlled trials are planned. This review aims to give an overview of current technologies with a specific focus on mobile health (mHealth) and appraise their value with regard to the available scientific data.
34086066	Medical errors are comprised of various problems. Influencing factors include the diseases and procedures involved, the types of errors and the consequential harms of the respective treatment processes. Their contribution is determined for the first time in an extended systematic analysis of errors ascertained by a professional commission. In all, 236 confirmed errors were analyzed based on 359 expert examinations by a professional commission from 1999 to 2019 regarding causes and consequences of errors. Errors occurring in a practice (103/43.6%) concerned diagnosis (69/29.3%) and therapy (34/14.4%). In contrast, errors occurring in a clinic (159/67.4%) concerned most often therapy (144/61.0%) and rarely diagnosis (15/6.4%). Some diseases and procedures were involved significantly more often than others, depending on their frequency and complexity or on the quality of treatment and the avoidance of errors. Types of errors were: diagnostics: inadequate examination (112/47.5%) or assessment (86/36.4%) of findings; indication: reason lacking (58/24.6%), disregarded or against (33/14.0%) intervention; information: inadequate explanation of risks (24/10.2%); therapy: inadequate performance of technique (59/25.0%), organization of treatment (16/6.8%), medication (6/5.5%); aftercare: inadequate follow-up (20/8.5%), information (15/6.3), management of complications (13/5.5%); documentation: inadequate (19/8.1%) and/or falsified (4/1.7%) records. Direct/primary harms of errors were: complications (126/54.7%), Clavien 3/4 (120/50.8%), Clavien 5 (death; 16/6.8%), unnecessary surgery (39/16.5%) or medication (40/16.9); surgical revision (83/35.2%), revision with intensive care (55/14.9%), error correction for mistake made elsewhere in a clinic (131/55.1%) or practice (13/5.5%). Indirect/secondary harms of errors were: delayed diagnosis/therapy (94/39.8%), functional or organic loss of kidney (6/2.5% or 7/3.0%), testis (2/0.8% or 22/9.3%), urinary sphincter (14/5.9%); extended/increased need of treatment (167/70.8%), prolonged suffering/diminished quality of life (173/73.3%), diminished chance of healing/prognosis (45/19.1%). Based on a systematic analysis of medical reviews over two decades, a summary is provided regarding types of diseases and procedures that are particularly prone to error in urology, the types of errors in the treatment process that give rise to direct and indirect medical error, and the that consequences have to be drawn.
34086070	Survey by the commission for cross-sectoral ophthalmology, as a joint commission of the German Ophthalmological Society (DOG) and the Professional Association of German Ophthalmologists (BVA) on the effects of the SARS-CoV‑2 pandemic on ophthalmological patient care in Germany. Online-based survey. A total of 1190 questionnaires were (partly) answered. With respect to outpatient care and consultations from 15 March to 15 April 2020, a total of 69 (5.8%) participants indicated unlimited, 756 (63.5%) reduced and 330 (27.7%) emergency care only, independent of the type of institution. Outpatient surgery was restricted to emergency surgery in 68% of clinics, 42.0% of inpatient wards, 45.0% of surgical medical care centers and group practices and 33.0% of private practices. Inpatient procedures were limited to emergency care in 75.0% of inpatient wards and in 71.0% of clinics. With the exception of endophthalmitis (+8.2%), the number of urgent indications and emergencies declined: retinal detachment (-34.8%), perforating eyeball injuries (-7.3%), acute glaucoma (-17.8%), central retinal artery occlusion and anterior ischemic optic neuropathy (-31.0%), others (-30.9%), penetrating keratoplasty and amniotic membrane transplantation (-59.1%). Institutional or professional policy requirements (76.0%) and appointment cancellation by patients (84.0%) were the most common reasons for limitations in ophthalmic patient care. The initial phase of the pandemic was characterized by a massive reduction in non-urgent conservative and surgical treatment that affected all areas of ophthalmology. Due to intensive care capacities required for COVID-19 patients, inpatient treatment was largely restricted to emergencies. Treatment of ophthalmological patients, including ocular emergencies and urgent treatment, was maintained across all sectors with a (considerable) decrease in the number of cases even in these groups.
34086072	Pars plana vitrectomy (ppV) combined with silicone oil tamponade is a standard technique in the treatment of complicated retinal detachment. There are still recurrent cases of retinal detachment after silicone oil removal or redetachment with in situ oil tamponade. The aim was to identify possible risk factors for retinal redetachment and to use the knowledge for optimizing treatment. Analysis of data from patients who were treated with ppV and silicone oil tamponade in the University Department of Ophthalmology in Marburg during 2010-2015 and who had a retinal redetachment during this period. The results were divided into two groups, redetachment with oil in situ and redetachment after oil removal. A total of 43 cases (15.6%) had a redetachment, which included 22/43 cases (50%) with a redetachment after oil removal and 21/43 cases (50%) with redetachment with oil in situ. The cause for the renewed detachment was given as proliferative vitreoretinopathy (PVR) in 90.6% (39/43) of the cases, new foramina in 20.9% (9/43) and persisting foramina in 25.5% (11/43). Vitreoretinal scar formation (PVR reaction) was the main risk factor for renewed retinal detachment. Persisting foramina were also named as a frequent cause. Recurrent retinal detachment represents a significant challenge for vitreoretinal surgeons and for the patients considering the economic and emotional burden due to multiple interventions.
