27764856	Surgical interventions on the major salivary glands are common procedures in otorhinolaryngology. In the case of benign or malignant salivary gland tumors, surgery is the treatment of choice. However, there are currently no medical guidelines regarding the diagnosis and treatment of benign and malignant salivary gland tumors. Since the introduction of sialendoscopy, new diagnostic and therapeutic options have become available for obstructive sialadenitis. This training article provides an overview of the anatomical principles, diagnostic options and the most important surgical procedures on the major salivary glands for the prospective ENT specialist.
27780279	The focus of professional self-control in medicine is the expert system. In order to provide a targeted development impulse in the dental expert system, a reflection from the perspective of the experts was initiated. 5 group discussions on the topic of &quot;Professionalization of the dental expert system&quot; were carried out with 32 experienced experts as discussants and evaluated using qualitative content analysis. The evaluation resulted in a catalog of 68 ideas, which were divided into 15 categories. Possible solutions discussed included, for example, expert quality circles, collegial/interprofessional exchange, supervision of new experts and feedback for experts/dentists. Greater reflexivity contributes to an improvement in the expert system and to quality assurance in the assessment.
27780280	Quality management (QM) was made compulsory for the outpatient sector 10 years ago. We wanted to know how GPs experienced the introduction of QM, what importance it has for them today and how they assess the future of QM. In a qualitative study design, doctors from a network of doctors were interviewed in expert interviews using a semi-structured interview guide. The written interviews were coded in triangulation in an initially inductive and then deductive process. In a discussion and agreement process, topic areas and code families were identified. The survey ended after information saturation. There was agreement to standardize some basic processes such as hygiene. However, QM could hardly be transferred to an area that is essentially characterized by interpersonal relationships and communication. The doctors stated that they had reduced QM to a tolerable and sensible level for them. Certification was largely rejected. Expectations for the next 10 years were rather pessimistic in terms of increasingly bureaucratic requirements. The legal introduction of QM was an intervention by society in the professional sphere of doctors. Instead of passive resistance and limiting QM to a tolerable minimum, committed, independent quality work could help to regain social trust in order to maintain the necessary professional autonomy.
30041262	In Germany, 10,000 cases of spontaneous pneumothorax are treated as inpatients every year. The German Society for Thoracic Surgery (DGT) in cooperation with the German Society for Pneumology and Sleep Medicine (DGP), the German Society for Radiotherapy (DRG) and the German Society for Internal Medicine (DGIM) in moderation with the Association of Scientific Medical Societies (AWMF) has developed an S3 guideline on spontaneous pneumothorax and post-interventional pneumothorax. Based on the source guideline of the British Thoracic Society (BTS) on spontaneous pneumothorax from 2010, a literature search was carried out on spontaneous pneumothorax from 2008 and on post-interventional pneumothorax from 1960. The relevant studies found were assigned evidence levels according to the Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine (2011). The recommendations were agreed upon in 3 consensus conferences according to GRADE (A: &quot;we recommend&quot;/&quot;we do not recommend&quot;, B: &quot;we suggest&quot;/&quot;we do not suggest&quot;) in a nominal group process. The algorithms for primary and secondary pneumothorax differ in the indication for CT chest and in the indication for drainage and minimally invasive surgery. Surgery is recommended on an individual basis, taking into account the risk of recurrence, living conditions, patient preferences and procedural risk. For some forms of secondary pneumothorax, a cautious indication for surgery is recommended. The treatment of post-interventional spontaneous pneumothorax is similar to that of primary spontaneous pneumothorax. The recommendations of the S3 guideline offer assistance in the management of spontaneous pneumothorax and post-interventional pneumothorax. Future epidemiological studies will show whether these have an influence on the currently partially existing diverging diagnostic and therapeutic measures.
30043699	Summary. Flying through several time zones leads to a temporary desynchronization of the internal clock with the external day-night clock. This results in what is known as jet lag, with difficulty falling asleep and staying asleep, increased daytime tiredness and a medically relevant reduction in well-being and performance. Knowledge of the internal clock and the regulation of the sleep-wake rhythm is an important prerequisite for medical advice on jet lag. A differentiated plan of action can be drawn up by also taking travel plans into account. Possible different measures and recommendations to support resynchronization to the changed time and to alleviate jet lag symptoms are shown below.
30043700	Summary. We report on a 29-year-old patient who was presented to the emergency department via outpatient clinic with severe abdominal pain. After an initially unremarkable medical history and laboratory results, it was only after a further medical history that the diagnosis was made: a paintball projectile had left its mark. The patient suffered a two-stage grade III spleen rupture, which only became apparent two weeks after the trauma. Successful organ-preserving, non-operative treatment was performed.
30043702	Summary. Pituitary adenomas (HA) are benign tumors from parenchymatous cells of the anterior pituitary lobe. A distinction is made between endocrine-inactive HA and hormone-secreting HA. The constellation of symptoms depends on the hormonal over- or under-function and the mass effect caused by the HA. In addition to headaches, HA often presents with visual impairments and visual field defects as a result of compression of the optic chiasm. Surgical resection via a transsphenoidal approach is the preferred treatment option for symptomatic or enlarging HA. Modern techniques such as intraoperative high-resolution MR imaging support the surgeon in the most safe resection. Symptomatic prolactinomas play a special role and should primarily be treated with dopamine agonists. Due to the complexity of the disease, interdisciplinary care of patients by neurosurgeons and endocrinologists in a center with high case numbers is recommended.
30043704	Summary. This review article aims to discuss protein intake in older people at risk for fragility fractures as a modifiable factor for fracture prevention. Proteins are building blocks of the bone matrix and muscles. This dual function fits with the concept of preventing fragility fractures in older people, which aims to both reduce bone loss and prevent falls. In older people, a protein-rich diet could represent another simple and efficient measure to promote bone and muscle health, in addition to the established recommendations for adequate vitamin D and calcium intake.
30043707	Summary. The electroencephalogram (EEG) offers a non-invasive and cost-effective method for electrophysiological recording of neuronal activity. The pathologies detectable in the EEG allow conclusions to be drawn about an abnormal functional state of the brain with high sensitivity but limited specificity. The main psychiatric indications for the EEG are an atypical clinical presentation of a neuropsychiatric syndrome, an atypical reaction to medication and basic diagnostics before starting certain medications or stimulation procedures. In current research, the EEG has attracted attention not only with regard to diagnostics, but above all with regard to predicting the treatment success of various therapeutic approaches. The following article deals with the electrophysiological principles of the EEG, EEG-supported differential diagnostics of various clinical pictures and new research approaches in diagnostics and therapy planning.
30045365	In the case of opening osteotomies on the distal radius, bone transplants increase initial stability and promote new bone formation, but are often associated with discomfort and complications at the donor site. Previous studies suggest that bone transplants may be unnecessary. Between 2013 and 2016, 19 patients with a symptomatic extra-articular distal radius fracture that had failed to heal in extension underwent corrective osteotomy using a palmar locking plate without additional bone transplantation. Three patients dropped out of the study prematurely due to implant-related complications. One patient refused follow-up. 12 patients (7 female and 5 male) showed complete remodeling of the defect after 5.5 ± 3.5 (1.5-13) months. The dorsopalmar inclination improved significantly from an average of 17 to -1 degrees, the DASH score from 41 ± 26 (7–94) points to 26 ± 25 (0–75) points. Radioulnar inclination, ulnar variance and pain level showed only slight, non-significant improvements. Range of motion and gross strength did not improve. Three female patients showed no remodeling after 10 ± 3 (6–12) months. In the modified Mayo wrist score, 1 satisfactory and 2 unsatisfactory results were achieved. One of these patients underwent reoperation with iliac crest graft transplantation. Although remodeling was only absent in female patients, there was no statistically significant dependence of bony healing on gender, age at the time of surgery or defect size. In the group with healing, there was no correlation between the time until bony healing and gender, age at the time of surgery or the size of the dorsal osteotomy gap. However, there was a correlation between the healing interval and the size of the palmar osteotomy gap. After opening osteotomy on the distal radius, remodeling can occur without filling the defect with a bone transplant. Since bone healing is unpredictable in individual cases and can take more than 12 months, we will continue to transplant bone in our own procedure.
30045366	Due to its special shape, size and position in the carpus, the scaphoid is considered the cornerstone of the wrist with an extremely important function for biomechanics. In the case of fractures, the precise evaluation of fracture morphology is therefore very important. In this regard, computer tomography (CT) images in the long axis of the scaphoid have long been considered standard among experts, but the method has not yet become a widespread standard and there are no sufficient studies on the superiority of this imaging technique. OBJECTIVE: The aim of this retrospective study was to examine whether the rate of agreement in the assessment of scaphoid fractures with regard to morphology between the assessors is higher for CT images in the long axis of the scaphoid than for CT images in the plane of the wrist and can therefore be considered more meaningful. Between 01/2014 and 04/2016, a CT scan of the long axis of the scaphoid was performed on 42 patients with a fresh scaphoid fracture. Reconstructions were made in the wrist plane from these CT images. The images of these 84 cases were anonymized and randomized. They were presented to 4 assessors (2 hand surgeons, 2 radiologists). They were asked to assess the images with regard to: location of the fracture, humpback, lateral displacement and Herbert classification. The surgeons were also asked to decide whether they would choose a palmar or dorsal approach and an open or percutaneous technique. The statistical analysis was carried out by an independent statistician between 2 and 4 assessors. In all evaluated parameters, a higher rate of agreement between assessors was found in the CT along the long axis of the scaphoid, although significance was only demonstrated for the humpback deformity. For the evaluation and assessment of scaphoid fractures, CT scans along the long scaphoid axis are more reliable than CT scans in the wrist plane and are therefore preferable.
30045367	Due to the functional coupling of the finger joints with each other and the quadriga effect of the flexor digitorum profundus, a changed grip pattern and thus also a changed force distribution of the hand can be assumed after distal interphalangeal joint fusion. Ten patients with isolated distal interphalangeal joint fusion of the index finger (DIP II, n = 2) or middle finger (DIP III, n = 8) with post-traumatic osteoarthritis and without other pathological changes in both hands were examined by manugraphy an average of 55 (17–121) months postoperatively. X-rays of the affected ray confirmed the bony formation of the arthrodesis and measured the arthrodesis angle. The total force and force distribution of the hand as well as the force of each finger and the force distribution on the individual finger joints were determined using three cylinder sizes. The force distribution was analyzed using 2D graphics. The results of the affected side were compared with the healthy opposite side. The patients&#39; pain reports were recorded using a visual pain scale. In the ten patients, the average strength of the affected hand compared to the healthy opposite side was 93% for the small cylinder, 97% for the middle cylinder and 96% for the large cylinder. The two patients with arthrodesis of the DIP II clearly spared the index finger ray when gripping and had relatively weak overall strength (68/62/68% for the three cylinders mentioned). The gripping pattern of all fingers was changed. The eight patients with stiffening of the DIP III achieved 99/106/103% overall strength on the opposite side. In the middle cylinder, the overall strength of 6 of these 8 patients was even over 100%. In terms of force distribution, there was reduced strength in the middle and ring fingers and greater strength in the index and little fingers. Five of the 8 patients showed a pathological load distribution within the middle finger with a noticeable pressure peak in the stiffened distal joint area. The arthrodesis angles in all ten patients averaged 6° (0–21°). Pain was reported on average as 1.4 (0-5) at rest and 2 (0-8) during exertion. There was no evidence of an influence of these two factors on the overall strength or the distribution of force. With an arthrodesis of the distal joint of the middle finger, the strength of the affected ray is reduced, but in terms of overall strength this is largely compensated by an adaptation of the index finger and sometimes also the little finger. An arthrodesis of the distal joint of the index finger appears to have a significantly greater influence on the grip strength and the distribution of force in the hand, although this is probably more due to a reactive sparing of the index finger than to a purely biomechanical effect.
30045368	Mixed Martial Arts (MMA) is a combination of different combat sports. Acute injuries are known and generally described in the literature. Nevertheless, there is little knowledge about degenerative changes in the musculoskeletal system. The aim of this study was to determine the influence of techniques used in MMA on the occurrence of degenerative changes compared to classic boxing. For this purpose, 11 MMA fighters and 10 boxers with chronic wrist pain were clinically examined. Age, weight, experience, number of fights and weekly training hours were asked. To determine the degenerative changes, an MRI of the painful hand was evaluated. Experience, level of competition and number of fights were not significantly different in the two sport groups (p &lt; 0.05), but the MMA fighters trained significantly more hours per week (19.5 vs. 8.5 h/w; p &lt; 0.001). However, MMA fighters had more frequent and more severe degenerative changes in all structures examined (bone, fibrocartilage, ligaments and tendons). In the category &quot;bone&quot; the differences were significant (p = 0.002). MMA fighters show a higher incidence and a higher degree of degenerative changes in the hand and wrist. Exact explanations are not yet known. Further research is needed to determine the influence of techniques on the severity of degenerative changes in the hand and wrist.
30045369	We report on the treatment of 10 women with severe pain from long-standing CRPS by continuous analgesia of the brachial plexus. The CRPS had existed for an average of 3.5 years before treatment; the average basal pain intensity was 8.3 on the numerical analogue scale (NRS). All patients met the Budapest criteria for CRPS. For treatment, a spinal catheter was implanted into the brachial plexus via an open approach. On average, 4.4 (minimum 2, maximum 8) implantations were performed per patient. Immediately after the start of the bubivacaine injection, there was a rapid and significant analgesic effect with pain reduction from 8.3 to 1.6. The duration of the catheter and the pain reduction was on average 5.3 (2 to 12) months. After removal of the catheter, the pain returned to the initial level. Ultimately, none of the patients experienced a permanent reduction in pain, not even a partial reduction in pain.
30045370	OBJECTIVE: This study examines whether there was a change in the treatment preferred by German hand surgeons for Dupuytren&#39;s contracture between 2015 and 2017, in particular whether there was an increase in percutaneous needle fasciotomy. In 2015 and 2017, 530 members of the German Society for Hand Surgery (DGH) were invited to participate in an online survey in which they were asked about their preferred treatment for Dupuytren&#39;s disease and the corresponding decision criteria, depending on the stage. 110 and 101 respondents took part, respectively. 86 of them stated that they treat up to 100 patients per year (group A), 24 and 15 treat more than 100 Dupuytren&#39;s patients (group B). In both surveys, limited fasciectomy was most frequently mentioned as the preferred treatment (82.9% and 87.7%). Treatment with clostridial collagenase is only performed sporadically (1.3% and 1.4% respectively). Percutaneous needle fasciotomy is only of some importance in stages I (19.1% and 10.9%) and II (16.4% and 9.9%) and is mainly performed by colleagues who treat more than 100 Dupuytren&#39;s patients per year. The criterion &quot;best result&quot; was cited as the most important motive in decision-making/indication (54.3% and 68.6%). There was no significant shift in the choice of treatment for Dupuytren&#39;s contracture in Germany between 2015 and 2017. In particular, there was no increase in PNF.
30045371	Two cases are presented below with persistent palmar dislocation in the distal radioulnar joint (DRUG) and the development of a consecutive florid complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS). Both dislocations were ultimately treated by a Bowers operation with plexus catheter placement and intravenous vitamin C administration. After the operation, the function of the wrist improved considerably and the CRPS symptoms were no longer detectable after just a few weeks.
30045376	Dynamic extension splint treatment is a proven method in the aftercare of finger extensor tendon injuries. We describe a simple, cost-effective and easy-to-perform modification of dynamic extension splint treatment, the “Sparti-Splint”.
30045382	Behçet&#39;s disease is a multisystem disease with inflammatory involvement, especially of the small and medium-sized arteries and veins. Histologically, the picture is that of leukocytoclastic vasculitis. The causes of Behçet&#39;s disease are unknown. Genetic factors are discussed in the pathogenesis. A &quot;classic&quot; autoantibody as a diagnostic tool is not known. The disease usually affects patients in the third decade of life and is rare in pediatrics. A very rare clinical form of Behçet&#39;s disease already occurs in the neonatal period. In this case, life-threatening courses have been described when it manifests. A family with a known disease in the mother will be presented, in which the second child was already noticed with ulcerations in the mucous membrane area in the first week of life. The question of transmission of autoantibodies, which this triggers in the child, must be discussed in this context. This clinical course is compared with courses from the literature in order to be able to derive recommendations for the therapeutic procedure. In our patient, ANAs were temporarily detected that correlated with those of the mother. Despite this, the course of the disease was mild and no further interventions were required. However, potential life-threatening symptoms should always be considered. Steroids seem to be the treatment of choice here. As pregnant Behçet&#39;s disease patients from the Mediterranean region and from countries with a higher prevalence, such as Japan, are increasingly migrating to Germany, the possibility of transient neonatal Behçet&#39;s disease should be considered when caring for newborns of mothers who are positive for Behçet&#39;s disease.
30045384	According to current registry data, a significant increase in revision operations in knee joint arthroplasty can be expected. These are often associated with pronounced bone defects. Stable and correct implant anchoring is and remains a challenge. The prerequisite for long-term and reproducible results is the selection of the correct reconstruction and anchoring strategy, taking into account the existing bone defect and the patient-specific anatomy.
30045387	Interest in regional health analyses has steadily increased in recent years. This is reflected nationally and internationally, among other things, in the publication of health atlases as a means of communication. The aim of this study was to examine the currently existing health atlases in Germany in a comparative analysis. A systematic online search was carried out using the Internet search engines Google, Unbubble and Bing. The term &quot;atlas&quot; was defined in advance and search terms (e.g. atlas, health) and inclusion criteria (e.g. time period, language) were specified. To categorize the hits, 12 categories (e.g. data basis, topics) and 89 variables (e.g. epidemiology, medicines) were created, to which the atlases found were assigned in a matrix for evaluation. The search resulted in 49 works that met the inclusion criteria. However, only 16 of these are atlases in the sense of the definition. The others can be classified as &quot;works with maps&quot;. The topic of epidemiology is addressed in 30 cases and health services research in 32. Health costs and prevention are addressed in 17 and 16 papers respectively. The study was able to identify a large number of health atlases. However, the majority of the results can be classified as a report with a map rather than an atlas. Nevertheless, the practical use of such works is evident, and with it the interest in region-specific health issues.
30045388	In February 2013, the Act to Improve Patient Rights (Patient Rights Act) brought a whole series of new legal regulations for different areas of application in the health care system into force. With the introduction of paragraphs 630a–h in the German Civil Code (BGB), the Patient Rights Act introduced a transparent presentation of general contract-typical aspects, a summary legal regulation of patient information and consent, the standardization of treatment documentation and a new basis for the right to inspect the treatment file. The special features of the treatment contract developed in the context of the highest court&#39;s case law were transferred into legal form and the factual presumptions known from established case law that can be assumed to be favorable for the patient under certain conditions were finally summarized as exceptions to the principle of objective burden of proof. In this paper, the regulations of the new paragraphs 630a–h in the German Civil Code are presented and examined with regard to the consequences that the medical expert must take into account in the medical liability process.
30045394	Fistulas of the lower urinary tract are rare diseases that are often associated with considerable morbidity. The treatment of such fistulas or leaks is technically demanding and represents an interdisciplinary challenge. The success rate of surgical procedures is limited, especially for fistulas caused by tumors or occurring after radiotherapy. Furthermore, severe comorbidities in this patient population often preclude surgical interventions, so that percutaneous treatment approaches are an alternative, less invasive treatment option. This overview is based on case series and case reports on the percutaneous treatment of fistulas and leaks of the lower urinary tract from the last four decades (1979 - 2017). Methods considered were ureteral fulguration, tissue adhesive-based embolization, non-detachable and detachable balloons, ureteral clipping, ureteral coiling, silicone and nylon plugs, and modified vascular plugs. Percutaneous treatment options for fistulas and leaks of the lower urinary tract allow for either temporary or permanent, instantaneous ureteral occlusion. Transrenal ureteral occlusion is generally a safe and reliable alternative to surgical repair of ureteral fistulas and leaks. To date, no technique has proven superior. Depending on the underlying disease, the optimal treatment option may vary. Therapy should be tailored to the individual needs of the patient. · Patients with therapy-refractory ureteral fistulas/ureteral leaks can benefit from transrenal ureteral occlusion. · Transrenal ureteral occlusion enables long-term symptom relief. · Interventional radiologists should be familiar with the common techniques of transrenal ureteral occlusion.
30045395	The transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) is a non-surgical intervention to relieve pressure on the portal vein system. Technical developments in recent years and expanded underlying pathophysiological knowledge have changed the indications for TIPS placement. This review therefore aims to address the current state of knowledge. To this end, current indications with regard to pathophysiological principles, indications and results are shown and discussed on the basis of the literature. Established indications for a TIPS were and are acute, endoscopically uncontrollable variceal bleeding and rebleeding within 5 days. The use of TIPS in the treatment of acute esophageal and gastroesophageal variceal bleeding as a so-called &quot;early TIPS&quot; has been newly included in the European recommendations. For secondary bleeding prevention, a TIPS is only indicated after first-line therapy has failed. However, recent studies show that TIPS implantation can prolong the bleeding-free interval and reduce mortality. In the case of therapy-refractory ascites, TIPS is only recommended for patients who do not respond to treatment with NSBB, although studies have shown that TIPS, compared to paracentesis, increases the glomerular filtration rate, controls ascites better and improves survival. Other possible indications are the use of TIPS in Budd-Chiari syndrome, acute portal vein thrombosis, hydrothorax, hepatopulmonary and hepatorenal syndrome (type 2), in patients with portal hypertensive gastropathy requiring transfusions and for the prophylaxis of complications before planned abdominal surgery, rarely in the case of bleeding from ectopic varices or in the case of chylothorax or chylous ascites. The TIPS is now an established procedure with a new indication as &quot;early TIPS&quot;. Although it is clearly superior to previous therapy with ligation and beta-blockers, it is only second in the European recommendations for the secondary prevention of bleeding, as well as for therapy-refractory ascites. In addition to already recognized indications, the use as &quot;early TIPS&quot; in acute esophageal and gastroesophageal variceal bleeding is new in the European recommendations. Strunk H, Marinova M, . Transjugular Intrahepatic Portosystemic Shunt (TIPS): Pathophysiologic Basics, Actual Indications and Results with Review of the Literature. Fortschr Röntgenstr 2018; 190: 701 – 711.
30045396	AIM: The aim of this study was to determine the diagnostic value of MRI-based strain analysis for detecting cardiac involvement in patients with systemic sarcoidosis. In addition, the strain values ​​were compared with standard MRI parameters (edema/T2 ratio, relative enhancement, late gadolinium enhancement) with regard to outcome. 61 patients with biopsy-proven extracardiac sarcoidosis were examined using cardiac MRI. According to the MRI results, the patients were divided into 2 groups: patients with (CMR+; n = 23) and without (CMR–; n = 38) sarcoidosis-typical cardiac changes. 22 age-matched healthy heart subjects served as the control group. Left ventricular function parameters as well as longitudinal and circumferential strain were measured in all three groups. Sarcoidosis patients had significantly reduced longitudinal strain (GLS) compared to those with healthy hearts, while no significant differences were found between the two patient groups. CMR+ patients had significantly reduced circumferential strain values ​​compared to CMR– patients and those with healthy hearts. No significant differences in circumferential strain were found between CMR– patients and those with healthy hearts. Patients with a negative outcome had a significantly lower GLS compared to those with healthy hearts. In addition, the GLS in patients with a negative outcome was also reduced compared to the other CMR+ and CMR– patients, but without reaching statistical significance. GLS is the only strain parameter that shows a significant difference between sarcoidosis patients with otherwise unremarkable MRI (CMR–) and those with healthy hearts, and is also reduced in patients with a negative outcome. Consequently, GLS could serve as a potential indicator of early cardiac involvement. · GLS is significantly reduced in sarcoidosis patients with otherwise unremarkable cardiac MRI compared to those with healthy hearts. · GLS is reduced in patients with negative outcomes. · GLS could serve as a potential indicator of early cardiac involvement.
30045397	AIM: The purpose of the study was to investigate whether there are impairments in left ventricular (LV) and right ventricular (RV) strain parameters during the follow-up period of acute myocarditis. In addition, the strain parameters were to be evaluated with regard to their predictive power for functional normalization during follow-up. 69 patients with myocarditis were examined in the acute phase (baseline) and after an average of 92.5 ± 50.4 days using cardiac magnetic resonance imaging. The “Lake Louise” criteria (T2 signal intensity ratio, “early gadolinium enhancement ratio” and “late gadolinium enhancement”) and LV and RV myocardial strain parameters were evaluated. A logistic regression analysis was performed to find predictors for functional normalization during follow-up. All inflammatory parameters improved significantly during follow-up (P &lt; 0.001 for all parameters). Accordingly, LV and RV function was also significantly improved in the follow-up examination (LV ejection fraction: 53.5 ± 12.7% vs. 61.3 ± 9.5%; P &lt; 0.001, RV ejection fraction: 54.1 ± 10.0% vs. 59.4 ± 6.3%; P &lt; 0.001). LV and RV strain parameters (longitudinal, circumferential and radial strain) also improved significantly in the follow-up examination compared to the initial examination (P &lt; 0.05 for all parameters). The initial LV global systolic longitudinal strain was the only parameter in the multivariate regression analysis that could independently predict functional improvement in the follow-up examination (OR: 0.303; P = 0.007). Pathological changes in LV and RV strain parameters can often be observed in the acute phase of myocarditis. These functional limitations often recover over the course of the disease. The additional determination of the initial LV global systolic longitudinal strain could also be helpful in predicting functional normalization over the course of the disease. · Impairments of myocardial strain in myocarditis usually recover over time. · RV dysfunction can often be observed in the acute phase. · The LV longitudinal strain can predict functional normalization in the follow-up examination.
30045398	Acute portal vein thrombosis (aPVT) is a serious disease with a high mortality rate. In symptomatic patients who do not respond to systemic anticoagulant therapy, interventional procedures have increasingly become established as an alternative to surgery. In the present study, we present initial results of interventional therapy for aPVT in a retrospective evaluation. Between 2014 and 2016, 11 patients were treated for aPVT (M: 7; F: 4; average age: 41.06 years). All patients showed rapid onset of symptoms without portal collateral formation. The patients&#39; thrombosis involved the portal vein (PA) (11/11), the splenic vein (VL) (10/11) and the superior mesenteric vein (VMS) (10/11). Recanalization techniques: catheter thrombaspiration (1/9), angiojet (7/9), solitary local lysis (1/9) and TIPSS (7/9). Local lysis was applied using a single catheter (5/9) or two catheter technique (4/9). The mean follow-up was 24.32 months. Successful transjugular-transhepatic puncture in 9 patients. The thrombus load could be reduced in all 9 cases with residual thrombi in PA (n = 3), VMS (n = 7) and VL (n = 5). Rethrombosis with persistent abdominal pain was observed in one case, progression of the thrombosis after initial recanalization in another case. Freedom from symptoms was achieved in 6 cases. One patient developed pleural effusions, respiratory insufficiency and portosystemic collaterals. The patients who could not be successfully intervened developed cavernous transformation of the PA. One with persistent abdominal pain. Interventional percutaneous procedures can improve the prognosis of patients with aPVT. The results indicate that in addition to reducing the thrombus, improving the inflow and outflow, if necessary using a TIPSS and lysis in a two-catheter procedure, is of utmost importance. · Pharmacomechanical thrombectomy with local lysis is a promising approach. · The transjugular transhepatic approach shows a low risk of complications. · TIPSS and two-catheter lysis can make a major contribution to improving flow.
30045399	OBJECTIVE: Quantitative and qualitative analysis of gadopentetate dimeglumine (GD) compared to gadobutrol in standard dose (sGb) or half dose (hGb) in thoracoabdominal temporally high-resolution contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance angiography (4D-MRA) with dynamic computed tomography (dCT) as quantitative reference standard in minipigs. Seven anesthetized Göttingen minipigs underwent thoracoabdominal dCT (0.37 s rotation time) and 4D-MRA (0.3 s/dynamic phase; transverse) examinations after administration of sGb and hGb, respectively. Eight other minipigs underwent coronary 4D-MRA examinations (1.3 s/dynamic phase; sGb, hGb, GSD). The dCT attenuation opacity was converted to absolute gadolinium concentrations and compared to maximum 4D-MRA signal intensity (SI) peaks. Bolus width was quantified using the width of the bolus at half the curve height (FWHM). The coronary 4D-MRA examinations were used for both quantitative and qualitative image analyses. After this comparison of the dose effects on SI in the transverse 4D-MRA, the coronary 4D-MRA were analyzed using quantitative and qualitative parameters. In the dCT (or transverse 4D-MRA), a 39.0% (or 14.5%) lower maximum arterial gadolinium concentration (or peak signal) and a 20.6% (or 33.8%) shorter FWHM were shown after administration of hGb compared to sGb. The difference between dCT and 4D-MRA resulted from plateaus or reversals of the signal peaks in 4D-MRA in 5/7 animals. While the highest signal peaks were achieved quantitatively with the administration of sGb, the image quality of the arteries was rated similarly good with all three contrast agent applications, despite a quantitatively slightly higher SI with the administration of sGb. In contrast, the image quality of the imaging of venous vessels was rated significantly higher after sGb administration. Peak gadolinium concentrations and 4D-MRA SI peaks are highest after sGb application. These differences are particularly evident in the venous phase of 4D-MRA and lead to superior image quality in multiphase 4D-MRA. · Gadobutrol in the standard dose produces the highest vascular gadolinium concentrations and 4D MRA signal intensity peaks. · Absolute vascular gadolinium concentrations and 4D MRA signal intensity peaks diverge at 3 T in the arterial image phase. · Plateaus or signal reversals lead to reduced arterial 4D MRA signal intensity peaks at 3 T. · Arterial image quality is rated similarly high with the different contrast agent protocols. · Venous vessel assessment of 4D MRA is significantly better with gadobutrol in the standard dose.
30045400	AIM: Direct comparison of different methods for better detection and differentiation of prostate cancer in diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI); comparison of the results with original DWI images and conventional apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) maps. In the retrospective study, DWI data sets from routine clinical examinations (b = 0, 50, 800 s/mm², acquired at a field strength of 3 T) of 104 patients with subsequent MR-guided prostate biopsy were analyzed. For each data set, exponential ADC maps (eADC), calculated DWI images (cDWI) and eADC maps for calculated b values ​​of 2000 and 3000 s/mm² were created. Contrast (CR) and contrast-to-noise ratio (CNR) were determined for each of the 123 lesions. Differences in CR and CNR between the different image types for malignant lesions (n ​​= 83) as well as group differences between benign (n = 40), low-risk (n = 53) and high-risk (n = 30) lesions were investigated using repeated measures ANOVA and one-way analysis of variance with post-hoc testing. Differentiability between benign and malignant lesions as well as between low-risk and high-risk malignant lesions was assessed using receiver operating characteristics (ROC) curves. CR and CNR were higher in the calculated DWI images and the corresponding c_eADC maps (b = 3000 s/mm² and 2000 s/mm²) than in the original DWI images, in the conventional ADC maps and in the eADC images at b = 800 s/mm². Benign and malignant lesions could be best distinguished using absolute value and CR in conventional ADC maps. For differentiating between low- and high-risk malignant lesions, however, CR in c_eADC followed by CR in cDWI images appeared to be most suitable. Calculated cDWI images and their corresponding c_eADC maps with b values ​​between 2000 and 3000 s/mm² are better suited for detecting prostate cancer than original DWI images, conventional ADC maps and eADC. · Prostate cancer may appear unremarkable in original DWI800 images. · Calculated DWI images with b = 2000 – 3000 s/mm² improve the lesion-to-normal tissue contrast in prostate cancer. · Calculated DWI images show higher contrast than ADC and eADC at b = 800 s/mm².
30045413	Psychotherapeutic practices in Germany can only meet the demand for care with long waiting times. One way to address the gap in care is to use low-intensity interventions. The aim of the review is to systematize low-intensity interventions to reduce depressive symptoms and to assess their effectiveness and acceptance before starting psychotherapy. 22 studies were identified whose interventions can be assigned to the intensity levels of active waiting, self-help, supervised self-help, short focused intervention and low-intensity psychotherapeutic treatment. The evidence on the effectiveness of individual interventions is limited; acceptance varies between interventions. The resulting system illustrates innovative interventions that can be used depending on resources and needs. Care models for the provision of low-intensity interventions are discussed.
30045414	Vibration-related damage to the hands is observed in a number of skilled trades, but also in connection with the practice of various sports. Bony, neurogenic and also vascular lesions can lead to chronic complaints and permanent functional impairment. From a vascular medicine perspective, the hand-arm vibration syndrome (HAVS) and the hypothenar/thenar hammer syndrome (HHS, THS) are of interest. From a surgical perspective, particular importance arises from the fact that both syndromes are recognized occupational diseases (BK 2104 and BK 2114 respectively), which must also be taken into account in the context of general medical care and in the assessment. Hypothenar/thenar hammer syndrome is triggered by repeated force in the area of ​​the little finger or the ball of the thumb and is characterized by a traumatic lesion of the ulnar or radial artery, which leads to ischemia-related pain in the acral supply area of ​​the affected hand arteries, usually in the dominant hand. If there is increased sensitivity to cold with vasospastic circulatory disorders as a result of exposure to vibrating tools and machines, this is referred to as hand-arm vibration syndrome. The study presents various clinical and functional diagnostic tests for diagnosis. Doppler and duplex sonographic exploration are of particular importance. Various radiological methods can complement the diagnosis. To treat the symptoms, medicinal and physiotherapeutic treatment approaches should be pursued, which are intended to improve perfusion by stimulating vasodilation. However, effective causal therapy is not available. For this reason, during an assessment, particular attention must be paid to taking the medical history in order to clearly identify the causative agent and the physical injury, as this may have socio-medical or pension-related consequences for the injured party.
30048997	Active fall prevention requires a precise analysis of the causes of falls and the introduction of targeted countermeasures. It is essential for quality assurance in inpatient rehabilitation. Primary prevention with general measures to avoid falls must be differentiated from secondary prevention with its specific and individually adapted measures. It is initiated after the first fall and takes into account the mechanistic fall analysis. This article presents a practice-oriented guide to fall prevention in rehabilitation, which is to be seen as an important component when developing rehabilitation concepts.
30048998	The incidence and survival rates of oncological diseases are increasing and with it the potential need for rehabilitation among those affected. Inversely to the number of cancer cases, medical rehabilitation services after an oncological disease are declining. The reasons for this decline have not yet been fully clarified. Written survey of cancer patients with breast, colon and prostate cancer after acute treatment. 376 people took part; the use of rehabilitation, the reasons for not using rehabilitation and health-related characteristics were recorded. The analyses were mainly descriptive. Half of those surveyed had used medical rehabilitation. Patients who opt for rehabilitation feel more stressed in terms of their health and have a higher degree of severity of the disease. Family, personal and private motives are given as reasons for not using rehabilitation. The written survey provided a variety of reasons why medical rehabilitation is not used after a cancer diagnosis. This can be used to derive suggestions for optimizing rehabilitation and its design.
30048999	In the present study, the prevalence of colonization with multi-resistant germs was investigated in 155 patients from oncology and 157 patients from cardiology rehabilitation using microbiological screening. 4.5% of oncology and 4.5% of cardiology rehabilitation patients showed colonization with multi-resistant pathogens. 2-MRGN and ESBL (2.9%) were detected most frequently. Oncology rehabilitation patients showed twice as high prevalence rates for 3-MRGN compared to cardiology patients (2.6 and 1.3%). Overall, oncology and cardiology rehabilitation patients show comparatively low prevalence rates for multi-resistant hospital germs.
30049000	The prevalence of diabetes mellitus (DM) has been rising for years. Due to the clinical picture, the importance of rehabilitative services is expected to increase. This article examines the use of medical rehabilitation from 2006 to 2013. The secondary data analysis is based on a scientific use file. DM is defined according to ICD-10 (E10-E14). The courses are presented in raw, age-standardized and stratified by age and gender. The utilization and prevalence per federal state are correlated. The standardized utilization rose from 2006 to 2013 for men from 170 to 204.4 and for women from 99 to 123.6 per 100,000. While it is declining among those under 60, it rose by around 80% in the 60-64 age group. The utilization correlates positively (r=0.64) with the population-related prevalence. Due to the increasingly later retirement age, the importance of rehabilitative services for people with DM is growing.
30049001	In neurological-neurosurgical early rehabilitation (NNFR), many clinical pictures are associated with an increased risk of pneumonia. A few years ago, the discipline of respiratory therapy was established to prevent respiratory complications. However, there are currently no studies that could prove the effectiveness of respiratory therapy with regard to the incidence of pneumonia in NNFR. The study included 81 phase B patients who received respiratory therapy during their stay and 81 control patients. Routinely collected data such as age, gender, diagnoses, comorbidities, duration of treatment as well as information on ventilation status and the development of pneumonia were analyzed retrospectively. The development of pneumonia was associated with a longer duration of treatment, a higher number of hours of ventilation, the presence of a tracheostomy tube and a tendency towards a lower early rehabilitation Barthel index on admission. The incidence rate of nosocomial pneumonia was 20% in both study groups. The groups differed significantly in the severity of the disease at admission, the duration of treatment, the number of dysphagia patients and the intensity of physical and speech therapy. A direct connection between the intensity of respiratory therapy and the incidence of pneumonia in the NNFR could not be conclusively demonstrated due to the insufficient comparability of the two study groups. The intensity of dysphagia therapy was, alongside the duration of ventilation, the strongest factor influencing the incidence of pneumonia.
30049020	Research results show changes in the intestinal microbiome in anorexia nervosa (AN). Alpha diversity (AD) represents the number of bacterial species in the intestine. Reduced AD and increased intestinal permeability (zonulin) can lead to inflammation and changes in nutrient absorption. AD was determined from stool samples from 18 AN patients and 20 normal-weight controls (NK) after 16S RNA sequencing. In addition, zonulin was determined as a marker of the intestinal barrier and inflammatory parameters.RESULTS: AN patients had reduced AD compared to NK (Chao-1 diversity: p=0.043, number of observed species p=0.042). Zonulin was not significantly reduced in AN patients compared to NK. There were no correlations between the serum parameters and AD. AN patients have reduced AD regardless of intestinal permeability. Reduced AD can also have a negative impact on calorie intake in AN. These results contribute to a better understanding of the disease and the development of new treatment options.
30051752	Summary. Sleep problems and disorders are widespread in childhood and adolescence. This review examines the connection between sleep problems and mental disorders in childhood and adolescence. Sleep problems and disorders are considered risk factors for the development of mental disorders, but also as symptoms and effects of mental disorders. Sleep behavior and psychopathology often interact, so that sleep problems contribute to the intensity and maintenance of mental disorders. This bidirectional connection can be observed in early childhood, school age, and in adolescents. Many studies have shown that there is a long-term connection throughout childhood development. Both environmental and genetic factors appear to play a role in the development and maintenance of this connection. Various research results show that the treatment of mental disorders and the treatment of sleep problems have a positive mutual influence. Therefore, taking sleep problems into account in the diagnosis and treatment, but also in the prevention of mental disorders, is strongly recommended.
30053761	Spondylodiscitis is an infection of the intervertebral discs with a subsequent infection of the adjacent vertebral bodies. The main causes are three groups of pathogens: bacteria (pyogenic infection), tuberculosis pathogens and fungi (granulomatous infection) and parasites. In pyogenic spondylodiscitis, mono-infections with Staphylococcus aureus usually predominate, with a frequency of up to 80%. The mortality rate for spondylodiscitis is 2-3%. Tuberculous infections are often associated with psoas and paravertebral abscesses. Neurological deficits are recorded in up to 50% of patients. Blood cultures for aerobic and anaerobic germs are used for microbiological diagnostics. However, histological examination leads to positive pathogen detection significantly more often. In terms of accuracy, 16S rRNA PCR is clearly superior to microbiological examination of tissue samples. MRI has a high level of sensitivity and specificity and is therefore superior to other radiological methods. The main goals of any treatment are to eliminate the infection, reduce the pain and restore and preserve the structure and function of the spine. A standardized antibiotic therapy for spondylodiscitis has not yet been clearly defined. The decisive factors are the detection of the pathogen and appropriate targeted antibiotic therapy. Antibiotic therapy should initially be administered intravenously for 2-4 weeks. This should then be switched to oral administration for 6-12 weeks. If antibiotic-resistant infections with neurological deficits are detected, it is recommended to perform a surgical procedure with careful debridement and instrumentation and to prescribe follow-up treatment with intravenous antibiotics for 3 weeks followed by 3 months of oral antibiotic treatment. Surgical interventions are indicated in the case of neurological deficits, progressive increase in spinal deformities, failure of conservative therapy with inadequate pain relief and uncertain germ identification. The choice of surgical procedure should be based primarily on the extent of bone destruction, the location and the individual circumstances of the patient. A good prognosis can be made if CRP and ESR drop significantly in the first few weeks.
30053762	Sacral fractures that occur without adequate trauma are divided into insufficiency fractures and stress fractures. While insufficiency fractures usually occur under physiological stress due to significant osteoporosis, stress fractures are caused by mechanical overload. The anterior pelvic ring is regularly involved. Due to the lack of a fracture or the low-energy nature of the accident, the correct diagnosis is often made late. Accordingly, the aim of the Osteoporotic Fractures Working Group of the Spine Section of the DGOU was to present the individual imaging procedures for correct, rapid and cost-effective diagnostics. To confirm the diagnosis, cross-sectional imaging should be initiated promptly in addition to conventional radiological diagnostics. CT is the best way to assess fracture morphology, which can identify potential signs of instability of the injury. Due to its high sensitivity, MRI can provide additional important information in the absence of fracture evidence in the CT, in young patients and in unclear situations. In case of a contraindication for MRI, nuclear medicine examinations are a good alternative.
30053763	The dosage of direct oral anticoagulants for long-term maintenance therapy after acute deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism often requires an individual decision in everyday life, as two doses are available for the preparations apixaban and rivaroxaban, for which there are no defined separate indication spectrums. The Association of Vascular Surgeons and Vascular Medicine Specialists in Germany has therefore developed this position paper. Patients with a clearly identifiable and temporary trigger factor for venous thromboembolism (e.g. trauma, surgery, acute internal disease, oral contraception, pregnancy) or an isolated lower leg vein thrombosis have a low risk of recurrence and are usually not anticoagulated permanently. If there is a high risk of recurrence with a persistent trigger factor (e.g. persistent active tumor disease, unequivocally proven antiphospholipid syndrome and a coagulation inhibitor deficiency of protein C, protein S or antithrombin with a positive family history of venous thromboembolism [VTE], first-ever pulmonary embolism, multiple recurrences of VTE), extended maintenance therapy is indicated unless a very high risk of bleeding speaks against it. In all patients with a past VTE in whom the anticoagulation phase would generally be terminated, extended prophylaxis can be continued, as these patients also have a higher risk of recurrence than someone who has never had a VTE.
30053765	Prevalence estimates for depression show diverging results in primary vs. secondary data. One reason for this is that different indicators are considered at different points in time. In this study, depression frequencies in survey and routine data are determined for a comparable survey period and age range. Differences between the data sources and the depression measures are examined. Three indicators are compared for the year 2010: a) self-reported medical diagnoses collected in the population survey, b) diagnoses in a standardized clinical interview, and c) diagnoses recorded administratively in routine data from a statutory health insurance company. In sensitivity analyses, privately insured survey participants and insured persons with care needs are excluded from the routine data. The definition of the administrative depression diagnosis varies depending on the coding frequency and diagnosis specificity. The highest prevalence rate is 9.8% for administratively recorded depression, the lowest is 5.9% for the self-reported depression diagnosis in the survey. The prevalence of depression recorded in the clinical interview is 8.4%. Specific age and gender-dependent distributions are evident. If non-specific depression diagnoses (F3x.8, F3x.9) are not taken into account, the administrative prevalence rate drops significantly. Depending on the definition of the administrative depression diagnosis, prevalence differences are reduced compared to the self-reported diagnosis. Differences to prevalences based on clinical interviews, however, remain and indicate that different groups of people are being included.
30060273	The current German and European guidelines recommend monotherapy with a platelet aggregation inhibitor (ASA 100 mg or clopidogrel 75 mg) for patients with peripheral arterial occlusive disease (PAD). In the COMPASS (Cardiovascular Outcomes for People using Anticoagulation Strategies) study, patients with PAD were given 2 × 2.5 mg rivaroxaban in addition to ASA 100 mg. This led to a significant reduction in cardiovascular events (MACE = Major Adverse Cardiovascular Events) such as cardiovascular death, myocardial infarction and stroke. Peripheral events (MALE = Major Adverse Limb Events) such as major amputation due to ischemia and acute severe ischemia were also significantly reduced. If oral anticoagulation is indicated in patients with PAD (e.g. in the case of atrial fibrillation), the current German and European guidelines recommend monotherapy with oral anticoagulants without additional platelet aggregation inhibitors. After peripheral intervention, dual platelet inhibition is usually carried out temporarily, analogous to coronary intervention. After peripheral bypass surgery, monotherapy with a platelet aggregation inhibitor is generally recommended. In individual cases, oral anticoagulation can be used for complex venous bypasses and dual platelet inhibition for plastic bypasses.
30060274	The new fully automated chemiluminescence immunoassays allow a reliable determination of gender-specific upper reference values ​​for calcitonin. CALCITONIN INCREASE: The gray area with non-specifically increased calcitonin levels caused by other diseases or medications can now be better defined. A recommendation for thyroid surgery is seen from a basal calcitonin limit of over 30 pg/ml in women and over 60 pg/ml in men. In our view, this achieves a good balance between overtreatment, i.e. thyroid surgery in the case of increased calcitonin and benign histology, and the risk of overlooking early-stage MTC. It is no longer necessary to perform a calcitonin stimulation test. Values ​​in the gray area (20 - 30 pg/ml in women and 30 - 60 pg/ml in men) should be checked every 3 - 6 months and surgery should be performed if the limit values ​​are exceeded. If one also takes into account the fact that a nearly 100% cure rate can be achieved with calcitonin levels &lt; 100 pg/ml, this leads to a further improvement in the reliability of using basal calcitonin levels in calcitonin screening for goiter nodosa. CALCITONIN SCREENING FOR FAMILIAR MEDULLARY THYROID CARCINOMAS: To rule out a hereditary variant of medullary thyroid carcinoma (RET mutation), a molecular genetic test should be performed at the time of initial diagnosis. Pheochromocytoma and primary hyperparathyroidism should be ruled out/diagnosed before thyroidectomy. The optimal time for prophylactic thyroidectomy is chosen taking into account the aggressive potential of the RET mutation and the calcitonin level.
30060275	PHARMACOKINETIC CHANGES: An adequate concentration must be achieved at the site of action right from the start and therefore the first dose of the antibiotic is administered without taking into account any impairment of renal function. Prolonged administration also plays a role here. For antibiotics that act via concentration dependency (aminoglycosides, cyclic lipopeptides), the dosing intervals must be extended if there is impaired renal function. For antibiotics with time-dependent effectiveness (beta-lactams, macrolides, linezolid, clindamycin), the dose must be reduced if the dosing intervals remain the same. The indication for therapy always depends on the severity of the symptoms and the risk profile. Biological side effects such as c. difficile infections (CDI) must be taken into particular consideration in geriatric patients. In addition to the selection of the active substance, the duration, dose and dosing interval of the therapy are always the focus in order to ensure an improvement in the quality of the prescription. The best clinical treatment outcome should be achieved while minimizing toxicity, development of resistance and costs. In older patients, more drug side effects and interactions are to be expected due to multi-medication. The use of cephalosporins or fluoroquinolones as primary therapy should be avoided due to the risk of Clostridium difficile infection.
30060276	The causes of immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) are very diverse. According to the current definition, ITP only exists if the platelet count is repeatedly below 100 × 10 <sup>9</sup> /l. The tendency to bleed in ITP is lower than in patients with comparable thrombocytopenia from other causes. ITP is a diagnosis of exclusion. There is no laboratory test or examination that &quot;proves&quot; ITP. The new classification of ITP into 3 stages has replaced the traditional classification into &quot;acute&quot; and &quot;chronic&quot;. The indication for treatment is not based solely on the platelet count, but also takes other individual patient factors into account. The drugs of choice in first-line therapy are predniso(lo)ne or dexamethasone. In the case of life-threatening bleeding, the additional administration of platelet concentrates is indicated. The most effective second-line therapies are the administration of thrombopoietin receptor agonists or splenectomy. In third-line therapy, preparations are also recommended “off-label”. Before invasive procedures, the platelet count should be increased preoperatively. An increase to the normal range is not necessary.
30060277	SEVERE HYPERLACTATEMIA IN INTENSIVE CARE PATIENTS: There are many causes for this, the most common being sepsis or septic, cardiogenic or hemorrhagic shock. Hyperlactatemia is an independent predictor of death in various groups of critically ill patients. If serum lactate levels are &gt; 10 mmol/l, 80% of patients die in the intensive care unit. If severe lactic acidosis persists for more than 48 hours, all patients die. Elevated lactate levels require immediate diagnostic evaluation and classification. The new definition of sepsis requires a serum lactate of &gt; 2 mmol/l with adequate volume replacement and the administration of vasopressors to achieve a mean arterial pressure of ≥ 65 mmHg in the case of persistent hypotension. The “1-hour bundle” of the Surviving Sepsis Campaign published in 2018 recommends determining the lactate level as the first measure – elevated lactate levels must be closely monitored. In addition, taking blood cultures, administering a broad-spectrum antibiotic and administering fluids and vasopressors in the first hour are recommended. The administration of crystalloids is recommended if the lactate level is elevated (lactate ≥ 4 mmol/l) or hypotension is present; fluid administration can be based on lactate clearance. In patients with impaired liver function, lactate metabolism is delayed. In patients with liver cirrhosis, the lactate level on admission to the intensive care unit is significantly associated with the number of organs failing and mortality. The 12-hour lactate clearance has a strong predictive value for survival if the baseline lactate level is above 5 mmol/l, and remains an independent predictor even after correction for the severity of the underlying disease. The greater the decrease in lactate during initial therapy, the better the outcome.
30060278	From the 2018/19 season, only quadrivalent influenza vaccines will be used. Even after two preparations each for the MenACWY and MenB vaccinations are available, the Standing Committee on Vaccination (STIKO) recommends these only in the case of specific immune deficiencies, and for children only the MenC vaccination from 12 months of age. HPV: In 2018/19, the STIKO is recommending HPV vaccination for boys for the first time, but not for adults. There is still no preference for the nonavalent vaccine. Convincing study data for the adjuvanted subunit zoster vaccine, which has been available since May 2018, mean that a statement from the STIKO is expected. CMV: Negative study results for the DNA vaccine ASP0113 in kidney and stem cell transplant recipients mean a delay on the way to a CMV vaccination. The rVSV-ZEBOV vaccine, which was only developed during the 2013-2016 outbreak, is already being used in the current outbreak in Congo.
30060279	RISK STRATIFICATION OF DUAL PLATELET INHIBITION (DAPT): The new guidelines deal with basic recommendations on the form and duration of DAPT. The focus is clearly on individualizing the therapy. It is recommended that the individual patient&#39;s risk of ischemia or bleeding be assessed with the help of expert teams or scores. The duration of DAPT is determined based on this. It is emphasized that the decision on the duration of DAPT is dynamic and should be re-evaluated at regular intervals. DUAL PLATELET INHIBITION AFTER ELECTIVE CORONARY STENT IMPLANTATION: Due to the significantly lower incidence of stent thrombosis thanks to the new stent technologies, the duration of DAPT is for the first time independent of the stent type (bare metal or drug-eluting stent). A duration of one month to 36 months is possible. The view of DAPT has thus changed from a stent-related to a systemic treatment strategy. DUAL PLATELET INHIBITION IN THE CONTEXT OF ACUTE CORONARY SYNDROME: In this context, the recommendations for DAPT have also been adjusted for patients with acute coronary syndrome (ACS) who are being treated conservatively (including patients with myocardial infarction in non-occluded coronary arteries) and for those who are being treated with bypass surgery. Consistent DAPT is recommended in both groups. The duration of DAPT also depends on the individual bleeding risk of the respective patient. With regard to starting DAPT in patients with non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction, it is now recommended that loading with a P2Y12 inhibitor (ticagrelor or clopidogrel) should be carried out at the time of diagnosis if coronary angiography is planned. DUAL PLATELET INHIBITION IN PATIENTS WITH INDICATION FOR LONG-TERM ANTICHOAGULATION: There are also new recommendations for patients with coronary intervention and an additional indication for long-term effective anticoagulation for atrial fibrillation. The guidelines take the position that the advantages of oral non-vitamin K anticoagulants (NOACs) over Marcumar could also apply to these patients. Therefore, a NOAC should be considered instead of Marcumar. It is also recommended that the duration of DAPT in combination with oral anticoagulation (triple therapy) be chosen depending on the individual risk of ischemia and bleeding. The option is now also given of using triple therapy only peri-interventionally and of switching to a dual regimen with oral anticoagulation and a platelet function inhibitor (aspirin or clopidogrel) upon hospital discharge.
30060280	PROPHYLAXIS OF CONTRAST-INDUCED ACUTE KIDNEY INJURY (AKI) (CONTRAST MEDIA NEPHROPATHY, CMNP): A high-ranking study published in November 2017 shows that the use of sodium bicarbonate is not superior to the administration of sodium chloride for the prevention of contrast media nephropathy. SGLT-2 ANTAGONISTS AND AKI: SGLT-2 antagonists presumably have protective effects with regard to CKD (chronic kidney disease). Recent observations suggest that treated patients are at higher risk of acute kidney injury. Cell-based therapeutic approaches for AKI have been evaluated in recent years, primarily under experimental conditions. The first human studies with mesenchymal stem cells are currently being carried out. However, the implementation of cell-based therapies for human AKI is still associated with numerous difficulties.
30060281	The interventional techniques for airway stenosis still include balloon dilatation, cryotherapy, laser therapy, argon plasma coagulation, brachytherapy, photodynamic therapy and stent implantation. The choice of therapy type is indicated depending on the extent and entity of the tumor. Endoscopic lung volume reduction using valve implantation or coil implantation is now an integral part of the COPD guidelines. Endoscopic thermal ablation (BTVA) and polymeric lung volume reduction (PLVR) are further treatment options for selected patients with advanced pulmonary emphysema. TLD is currently being clinically investigated for patients with COPD and therapy-refractory bronchial asthma. Thermoplasty is the only established endoscopic procedure for therapy-refractory bronchial asthma. Cryospray therapy is available for patients with chronic bronchitis, and its effectiveness and safety are also being tested in studies.
30060282	The treatment of fibromyalgia syndrome (FMS) is based on strengthening the patient with regard to physical exercise, physiotherapy measures and disease management strategies. In addition to the current, guideline-based concepts, this article also addresses new therapeutic approaches and pathophysiological considerations. The biopsychosocial disease model is still valid. FMS is understood as an &quot;end state&quot; as a result of various etiological factors and pathophysiological mechanisms. In recent years, a &quot;small fiber&quot; pathology has been discussed, as has the potentially negative influence of high fructose consumption on serotonin metabolism. The diagnostic criteria were slightly modified in 2016, and the German guideline was last updated in 2017. The core symptoms are generalized pain, sleep disorders and fatigue. FMS can occur alongside other diseases. However, it is important to rule out organic causes. The focus is on physical activation and symptom-oriented measures. Primary drug therapy is not recommended, especially NSAIDs or opiates should not be used. In severe cases, multimodal treatment should be used. New drug therapies are still a long way from being used clinically.
30060283	In Germany, an estimated 19,000 people will develop pancreatic cancer in 2018. The 5-year survival rate (5YR) of all pancreatic cancer patients is very low at around 6%, and potentially curative surgery is only possible for 15-20% of patients. Through more frequent use and combination of systemic chemotherapy agents, life expectancy has improved in recent years. After complete surgical resection of pancreatic cancer, adjuvant chemotherapy helps to prolong overall survival. The drugs of choice are gemcitabine or 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and folinic acid (FS). The combination of gemcitabine and capecitabine (Gem-Cap) was recently shown to significantly prolong overall survival compared to gemcitabine monotherapy. There is currently no recommendation for the use of adjuvant chemoradiotherapy. Neoadjuvant therapy has no significance for pancreatic carcinoma outside of clinical trials. An exception is borderline resectable pancreatic carcinoma. ADVANCED STAGE (M1): Patients with advanced or metastatic pancreatic carcinoma benefit from chemotherapy. For patients with a good ECOG status, two phase III trials recently showed a significant increase in life expectancy through the combination of gemcitabine plus nab-paclitaxel (Gem-Nab) and the combination regimen of folinic acid, 5-FU, irinotecan and oxaliplatin (FOLFIRINOX). In the second line, nanoliposomal irinotecan or oxaliplatin combined with 5FU/FS (OFF) is available. The molecular characterization of pancreatic carcinoma has made progress and already offers approaches to personalized medicine. If the ECOG status is good, an MSI-H/dMMR analysis should be performed before second-line therapy to evaluate the possible use of checkpoint inhibitor therapy. In cases of BRCA mutations, the administration of PARP inhibitors can be promising.
30060285	A 41-year-old, previously healthy man was bitten by a tick during a safari tour in the Kruger National Park. 5 days later, he developed a high fever and felt very ill. A characteristic ulcer with a blackish base, scab formation and a red halo (eschar, tache noir) developed at the tick bite site. The travel and tick bite history suggested the suspicion of rickettsiosis. The diagnosis of rickettsiosis from the spotted fever group was confirmed serologically. The clinical course of the rickettsiosis was complicated by myocarditis, which was initially only noticeable due to an increased troponin-I and was later confirmed by cardiac MRI. The complicated course and the singular eschar suggest an infection with Rickettsia conorii. The symptoms of the febrile infectious disease resolved quickly under treatment with doxycycline. The recovery from imported travel sickness was delayed by the myocarditis. Rickettsioses should be considered in the differential diagnosis for travelers to Africa. They are usually mild; complicated courses can also occur in healthy young people.
30060288	Since the therapeutic relationship in correctional facilities or in forensic psychiatry is particularly strained due to the coercive nature and the therapist&#39;s dual role as practitioner and expert, the therapeutic relationship in correctional facilities was compared with the therapeutic relationship in general psychiatry. 52 patients in correctional facilities and 65 patients in general psychiatry answered the Psychopathy Personality Inventory - Revised (PPI-R), the Inventory for the Assessment of Interpersonal Problems - German Version (IIP-D), the Questionnaire for the Assessment of Psychotherapy Motivation (FPTM) and the Working Alliance Inventory - Short Revised (WAI-SR). Statistically, descriptive analyses were carried out, and univariate <i>t</i> -tests, multivariate <i>t</i> -tests and generalized linear models were calculated. The quality of the therapeutic relationship is perceived just as positively by patients in correctional facilities as by patients in general psychiatry. Patients in psychiatric treatment tend to be more convinced that the techniques used in therapy help them achieve their therapy goals. The therapeutic relationship in psychiatric treatment is just as strong as in general psychiatry. This could be due to the longer periods of detention in psychiatric treatment, usually lasting several years, during which significantly more time can be spent on building relationships than in a therapy limited to a few weeks in general psychiatry.
30060289	The ability to make decisions becomes relevant in psychiatry when treatment is medically necessary but at the same time has to be carried out against the patient&#39;s natural will. A substitutive decision then requires a normative justification. Can the dialectic between the patient&#39;s subjectively experienced certainty of decision and the medically required compulsory caring treatment be reformulated from a medical anthropological perspective as a substitutive decision, assuming the patient&#39;s inability to make decisions and at the same time the requirement to treat them, assuming presumed will? After defining legal terms, assumptions that underlie the canonical concept of individual autonomy are worked out. An anthropology of the encounter space when involuntary but medically necessary measures are applied is then outlined, based on the given treatment (a)symmetry and the potential resonance capacity. On this basis, a critique of the purely monistic concept of the mentally ill, without taking social interrelationships into account, is justified. The argument leads to a pragmatics of prudent decisions under uncertainty. The ability to make self-determination as a normative concept means ensuring decision-making autonomy as the ability to take prudent care of oneself. It is to be understood as the result of a balanced ability to judge one&#39;s own intentions, which takes into account a contextual consideration of contingencies and a foresight of the consequences of action. The canonical dialectic between sovereignty (corresponding to the ability to make self-determination) and subsidiarity (corresponding to substitutive decision) is based in the model proposed here on the assumption of treatment asymmetry and personal resonance ability. When considering substitutive decisions, the patient&#39;s supportive social microsystems should be taken into account. The anthropological examination of the dialectic between self-determination and substitutive decision leads to a reflection on individual solutions with an uncertain outcome rather than to categorical decisions. All those involved in the substitutive decision and relevant third parties should be taken into account in the decision-making process.
30064147	The prevalence of diabetes mellitus (DM) or malnutrition in hospitalized patients is higher than that of the general population, depending on the respective specialty. This is associated with increased postoperative complications and rising treatment costs. The subjective quality of life of inpatients can also be impaired, but there is only limited data on this, especially in trauma surgery. Factors influencing both the postoperative complication rate and the quality of life of trauma surgery patients could provide information on this. In a prospective study between June 2014 and February 2017, 1643 trauma surgery patients in traumatology, geriatric traumatology, septic trauma surgery and endoprosthetics were examined and assessed with regard to clinical outcome, complication rate and quality of life (Short Form Health Survey 36, SF-36) depending on diabetes mellitus (DM) and nutritional status (Nutritional Risk Screening 2002, NRS). At 12.4%, there is a significantly higher prevalence of DM and at 18.3%, a higher risk of malnutrition (NRS ≥ 3) in inpatient trauma surgery patients compared to the normal population (DM 7.2%). Patients with DM had a significantly higher complication rate than patients without DM. Patients at risk of malnutrition also showed significantly more complications. In addition, patients with DM rate their subjective quality of life lower in most dimensions of the SF-36, especially those that are subjectively assessed physically, than patients without DM, while patients with an NRS ≥ 3 rate their quality of life worse in all dimensions of the SF-36 (physical and mental) than patients without risk of malnutrition. We can also show that a reduced nutritional status leads to a poorer assessment of subjective quality of life than is achieved by the presence of DM. The presence of diabetes mellitus and an increased risk of malnutrition appear to influence the subjective assessment of quality of life and the complication rate in trauma surgery patients. In order to ensure comprehensive coverage and comprehensive specialist treatment of affected patients in the future, interdisciplinary diabetes centers should be established. This could probably reduce the complication rates and the resulting higher treatment costs.
30064148	Multiple myeloma (MM) is a malignant hematological plasma cell disease of mostly elderly patients, in which neoplastic cell populations in the bone skeleton lead to osteolytic bone destruction. Over 50% of all myeloma patients suffer pathological fractures during the course of the disease. At around 15%, MM is the most common malignant tumor of the spine, with 8-10% showing tumor-related neurological deficits. In addition to oncological, antineoplastic systemic therapy, surgical therapy is an essential supportive treatment measure for patients with MM and is used to reconstruct and stabilize affected skeletal sections after myeloma-associated bone destruction and to treat accompanying complications. Based on a comprehensive literature search, which was carried out selectively in PubMed using the keywords “multiple myeloma” and “surgery” or “fracture”, the available primary and secondary literature was evaluated to assess current surgical treatment methods. German and English-language systematic reviews, meta-analyses, clinical studies and international treatment recommendations from 1975 to spring 2018 were included. When pathological fractures or instabilities of the skeletal system occur due to tumor-related bone destruction, stabilizing operations are essential for maintaining and restoring function and mobility. A distinction is made between absolute and relative indications for surgical treatment of MM, which depend on the extent and findings of bone lesions that endanger stability or manifest pathological fractures as well as accompanying complications such as neurological deficits and bone pain that is refractory to conservative treatment. The spectrum of surgical treatment options in the area of ​​the extremities ranges from composite osteosyntheses with various force carriers to modular tumor endoprosthesis systems. Minimally invasive procedures such as kyphoplasties and vertebroplasties, but also selective decompressions as well as fusion spondylodeses and vertebral body replacement procedures are used to stabilize tumor-related spinal destruction. The surgical method and timing of treatment are to be chosen individually and depending on the risk profile and prognosis of the myeloma patient. The basic aim and requirement of surgical stabilization interventions should be definitive and load-stable treatment, which ensures restitutio ad integrum in the usually long course of the disease of the myeloma patient. Adjuvant radiotherapy is recommended postoperatively. Surgical treatment of MM plays a key role in the holistic treatment of the myeloma patient in order to reduce suffering and restore function and mobility of the affected skeletal sections, thus maintaining mobility and quality of life for the tumor patient. The spectrum of surgical treatment strategies is complex and demanding.
30064152	The desire to be able to control one&#39;s own health until the end of one&#39;s life has become very important in our society. Women and men of different ages, socio- and educational backgrounds and different cultural backgrounds are increasingly making decisions about future treatments in advance (planning treatment in advance, BVP). Identification and analysis of research literature on the preventive behavior of men and women in Germany. The focus is on gender-specific differences. Systematic review of empirical studies with gender-specific data on preventive behavior in Germany. Dedicated analysis of 21 of the 479 articles extracted. In the case of anticipatory treatment decisions, it can be seen that preventive behavior is influenced by interacting factors such as sex, age, cultural and ethnic background, religion and education. A prevalence of preventive behavior that can be explained purely by gender cannot be derived from the studies. This prima facie negative result is partly due to the design of the studies themselves. Heterogeneous data and a lack of gender sensitivity generally leave the question of the relationship between preventive behavior, sex and gender unanswered. The studies analyzed reduce the gender dimension to a dualistic classification, ignore individual role models and attitudes (gender) and also ignore geographical and cultural contexts. This results in a research desideratum for studies with a reflected gender and culture-sensitive focus.
30064153	Germ cell tumors of the testis can be cured in well over 90% of cases by chemotherapy with cisplatin, etoposide and bleomycin (PEB). Chemotherapy is tolerated by the mostly young men without serious complications. Cardiovascular complications are extremely rare, but have increasingly come into focus in recent years. A 33-year-old man with testicular seminoma in clinical stage 2b underwent PEB chemotherapy. At the end of the first cycle of this therapy, an acute ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) occurred. Coronary angiography showed a circumscribed stenosis in the proximal ramus circumflexus of the left coronary artery with a dissection and thrombotic deposits, with an otherwise unremarkable vascular status. The stenosis could be treated by stent placement. Seminoma therapy was continued with radiotherapy with 30 Gy. Complete remission was achieved. 6 months later, the patient&#39;s heart is healthy and free of recurrence. Serious cardiovascular complications occur in approximately 0.3% of all chemotherapy treatments for testicular tumor patients. The cause is suspected to be direct endothelial damage caused by cisplatin with subsequent thrombotic deposits. Due to the lack of comorbidity, the prognosis for these complications is usually good. Those providing treatment should be aware of this rare complication so that immediate diagnosis and treatment can be initiated if necessary.
30068014	Prophylactic total gastrectomy is the treatment of choice for patients with a proven pathogenic germline mutation in the CDH1 gene and thus a high risk of developing diffuse hereditary gastric cancer (HDGC). Minimally invasive surgical procedures have been established in the field of oncological gastric surgery in recent years. A total of 12 patients were cared for in our center for hereditary tumor diseases between 2013 and March 2018 due to a proven CDH1 germline mutation and underwent prophylactic gastrectomy in our clinic. The perioperative results were prospectively recorded in a database. In 5 cases an open (period: 2013 - 2015) and in 7 cases a minimally invasive (period: 2016 - 2017) prophylactic gastrectomy was performed. The median age of the overall collective (7 women and 5 men) was 42 (19 - 60) years. The average operation time was 291 ± 72 minutes (open: 269 ± 70; minimally invasive: 307 ± 75). The perioperative 60-day mortality and the anastomotic insufficiency rate were 0%. Postoperative complications occurred in 3 patients (one each of II, IIIa, IVb according to the Clavien-Dindo classification), corresponding to a morbidity of 25% (3/12). The postoperative length of stay was 14.5 ± 6.2 days (open: 16.2 ± 7.9; minimally invasive: 13.3 ± 5.0). Intramucosal carcinomas (pT1a) were diagnosed in 10 patients (10/12; 83%) during histological workup, 9 of which had multifocal spread. Advanced carcinomas (≥ pT1b) and lymph node metastases were not present in any case. Patients suspected of having an increased risk of hereditary diffuse gastric cancer should be cared for in an interdisciplinary center for hereditary tumor diseases. Minimally invasive (laparoscopic) prophylactic total gastrectomy is a feasible and safe risk-reducing procedure in patients with CDH1 gene mutation and hereditary gastric cancer. Consequently, in the absence of contraindications and existing expertise, minimally invasive surgery should be the standard procedure in this special group.
30068015	INTRODUCTION: Complications after the creation of permanent intestinal stomas are common and lead to serious problems in the stoma care of affected patients. The aim of this prospective, unicentric follow-up study was to record late complications in our own patient collective and to identify potential risk factors. All patients in our clinic with a permanent intestinal stoma between 2006 and 2016 were included in the study. 50 patients agreed to a follow-up examination (14 female [28%], 36 male [72%]). Stoma-associated complications were analyzed as part of a systematic follow-up examination (standardized questionnaire, clinical examination, abdominal wall sonography). The range of indications included malignancies (n = 27; 54%), anastomotic insufficiencies (n = 10; 20%), acute diverticulitis (n = 7; 14%), chronic inflammatory bowel disease (n = 5; 10%) and rarer indications. The three most common late complications were peristomal skin irritation (n = 25; 50%), parastomal hernia (n = 14; 28%) and stoma prolapse (n = 9; 18%). Acute diverticulitis led to increased stoma retractions (p = 0.012). Double-barreled stomas showed an increased incidence of hernias (p = 0.044) and prolapses (p = 0.047). Ileostomies are problematic with regard to peristomal skin irritations (p = 0.021). Patient age, gender or stoma creation during emergency surgery did not represent independent risk factors for the occurrence of late complications in our collective. Professional pre- and postoperative stoma therapy/care including preoperative stoma marking and structured stoma-specific aftercare by stoma therapists and surgeons as well as general practitioners, as well as stringent and timely treatment of structural complications, can prevent and mitigate late complications of permanent intestinal stomas. Interestingly, stoma creation during emergency surgery was not an independent risk factor for the occurrence of late complications.
32447431	Incidents in hospitals often occur hours before the event and could usually be detected earlier and presumably avoided. Quality management programs from US hospitals with the aim of reducing deaths after a serious postoperative complication (“failure to rescue”, FTR) have not yet been introduced in Germany in this form. A sensitive score-based early warning system for impending complications is crucial for a hospital’s successful emergency management. In addition to measurement rounds, the frequency of which is adapted to the condition, this includes the effective communication of the findings to the ward doctor of the specialist department, who ideally solves the problem under his own responsibility. If the deployment of a medical response team (MET) is necessary, there must be clear alarm channels and the ward staff must be able to take bridging initial measures until the MET arrives. The MET provides emergency and intensive care expertise to peripheral wards around the clock. It must be familiar with the area, adequately equipped and trained. Communication skills are particularly important in order to be able to handle the immediate emergency situation, but also to organize subsequent diagnostics and therapy escalation. The MET, which can only improve patient outcomes if the alarm is raised in a timely manner, is just one of the links in the in-hospital rescue chain. Feedback systems, such as participation in the German Resuscitation Register, enable reflection on one&#39;s own performance in a national comparison. The opportunities associated with the establishment of an MET will only be fully realized through integration into an in-hospital emergency concept; this determines the added value for patient safety.
32450561	Background: A large number of drugs are available for treatment in holistic therapy systems. One source of information on the clinical use of such drugs is the experience of doctors and therapists. For drugs in anthroposophic medicine (AM), a system for documenting, evaluating and compiling medical experience of use has been developed: the Vademecum Anthroposophic Medicines. Material and Methodology: The Vademecum contains structured information on AM drugs, including therapeutic ratio, indications and recommendations for use. The information is based on the documentation of medical experience of use using 17-point forms, which are then reviewed by an interdisciplinary editorial team. We present here a descriptive analysis of the Vademecum, 4th edition. Results: The Vademecum includes 799 different AM drugs recommended for 1,773 indications, based on 2,543 documentation forms completed by 274 doctors from 19 countries. The 799 AM drugs account for 52.6% of all AM drugs that were on the market in Germany in 2015–2016. The 1,773 indications correspond to 544 different three-digit ICD-10 codes, which accounts for 29.3% (n = 544/1,854) of all three-digit ICD-10 codes. A total of 30.6% (n = 542/1,773) of all indications are based on 2 or more documentation forms. Conclusion: Today&#39;s Vademecum covers more than half of all AM drugs and more than a quarter of all three-digit ICD-10 codes. The Vademecum approach can also be relevant for drugs from other holistic therapy systems.
32450574	There are some studies in the literature investigating the effect of preoperative use of dutasteride on bleeding in open simple prostatectomy. Our aim was to assess the effect of preoperatively administered dutasteride on perioperative bleeding in open simple prostatectomy. We performed a retrospective analysis of the medical records of all patients who underwent transvesical open prostatectomy for benign prostatic hyperplasia at our institute between 2008 and 2018. Patients were divided into 2 groups with regard to preoperative use of dutasteride as follows: Group 1 received dutasteride for a minimum period of 6 weeks before surgery, group 2 was not pretreated with dutasteride. A total of 167 patients who met the inclusion criteria were included in the study. The mean operation time was 86.5±18.7 min, and blood loss was estimated at 640.7±55.7 ml. No statistically significant differences were found between the two groups in terms of operative time, estimated blood loss, and decrease in hemoglobin and hematocrit levels. We found no benefit from preoperative use of dutasteride in perioperative bleeding during open simple prostatectomy for the treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia.
32450579	Multifocal intraocular lenses (MIOLs) can offer patients a certain degree of independence from glasses. In practice, however, the question often arises as to which patients are actually suitable for the implantation of MIOLs. It is not uncommon for people to hesitate to implant MIOLs in patients with maculopathies because of the concern that the multifocality of the implanted IOL will further limit these patients&#39; visual performance. The aim of this study is to use virtual implantation to find out how MIOLs of different designs affect vision in maculopathies. This prospective study included 17 pseudophakic, healthy eyes (group 1) and 13 pseudophakic eyes with various maculopathies and lower visual acuity (group 2). The best corrected distance visual acuity (BCDVA), near and distance corrected near visual acuity (CNVA and DCNVA) and contrast sensitivity were recorded and analyzed while the patients looked through the &quot;VirtIOL intraocular lens implant simulator&quot;, which is intended to simulate vision through implanted intraocular lenses. The measurements were carried out for 3 different IOL types: aspheric monofocal lens, EDOF lens (EDOF: &quot;extended depth of focus&quot;) and diffractive trifocal lens. The results were compared between the different IOL types and between the two groups. In addition to lower visual acuity, patients with maculopathies also had lower contrast sensitivity compared to those with healthy retinas. The advantage of using multifocal IOL types compared to monofocal IOLs is evident in both groups, which each showed a significantly increased distance-corrected near visual acuity: 0.29 logMAR and 0.39 logMAR visual acuity improvement for EDOF and trifocal IOLs in group 1 and 0.17 logMAR and 0.25 logMAR visual acuity improvement in group 2. However, contrast sensitivity in the low spatial frequency range of 3 cpd is reduced compared to the monofocal IOL. For the visual functions examined in this study, MIOLs are a practical option for patients with maculopathy, in order to meet the desire to be independent of glasses. Even if their visual quality is already limited, the advantage of multifocal IOLs in terms of improved reading ability without additional near correction is still evident in the patients currently examined compared to monofocal IOLs.
32450585	Modern, individualized therapies can improve the survival of patients with colorectal cancer. However, not all patients are referred for treatment to a certified colorectal cancer center, where their therapy is carried out in accordance with guidelines, supported by a tumor board. Therefore, second opinions in cancer are currently being discussed. This study describes the results of a pilot study regarding the feasibility and need for a structured, online-based, qualified second opinion for patients with colorectal cancer. During a 15-month pilot phase between 2009 and 2011, patients with colorectal cancer were able to obtain a qualified second opinion from a tumor board free of charge using an online-based electronic patient record, supported by a case manager. Their satisfaction and quality of life (EORCT QLQ-C30) were monitored for over a year. In 95% of cases, a complete electronic patient record and a second opinion were created. Less than half of the participants received their first treatment recommendation from a clinic with a tumor board. The first opinion was confirmed by the second opinion in 40% of cases, in 33% there was a partial deviation and in 27% there was a significant deviation. When the differing second opinion was implemented, the patients&#39; quality of life improved. The creation of an online-based, qualified second opinion by an interdisciplinary tumor board is technically and logistically feasible. The online-based second opinion could significantly improve the quality of treatment for patients with colorectal cancer in the future and thus increase their quality of life.
32451566	BACKGROUND: Fatigue as a result of cancer and cancer therapy is recognized as being able to impair quality of life. Little is known about the frequency and intensity of fatigue syndrome after tumor therapy in the ENT area. The authors therefore conducted a random sample survey using the standardized Multidimensional Fatigue Inventory (MFI 20) in German as part of the follow-up consultation. As part of the tumor dispensary consultation, 66 patients (average age: 63 years) were interviewed, 21 of whom were women. All patients had received radiation therapy an average of 2 years previously (range: 1–4 years). At the time of the survey, all respondents were in full remission. The MFI-20 was evaluated in accordance with the recommendations in 5 subgroups: general exhaustion, physical exhaustion, reduced activity, reduced motivation, and mental exhaustion. For comparison with norm values, groups were divided by age into those under and over 60 years of age and a gender-specific evaluation was carried out. Regardless of gender, the patients rated themselves very clearly with high scores in all subgroups. Those under 60 in particular reported very high stress levels. The authors were surprised by the clarity of the results. Fatigue represents a very serious and long-lasting impairment for the patients studied here. Since fatigue can still be present long after the end of therapy, it is advisable to ask about it specifically and with a standardized inventory during follow-up care. To cope with the exhaustion syndrome, targeted therapeutic advice on activation such as regular physical activity, nutritional advice and complementary measures can then be recommended.
32451594	The Ottawa Charter of 1986 marked a paradigm shift that orients all public health efforts towards strengthening community activities and creating health-promoting living conditions. A key to this is &quot;capacity building&quot; (CB), understood as the development and, if possible, sustainable implementation of structural capacities - such as coordinated data collection, coordination processes across sector boundaries, permanent provision of basic resources - in all areas of health promotion &quot;on site&quot;. Diverse efforts and three and a half decades later, we are still far too often faced with infrastructure deficits, fragmented public health landscapes and obstacles to intersectoral cooperation. While the theoretical consensus on what is necessary appears broad, it remains a challenge to put these theoretical insights into practice. In this situation, Digital Public Health (DPH) can help overcome barriers and make &quot;data for action&quot; more visible and accessible. DPH enables data to be integrated, structured and disseminated in novel ways.This article discusses how capacity development at the local and municipal level can benefit from technological developments and what DPH can do to provide information services in the area of ​​public health capacity. The focus is on the web-based, interactive representation of health promotion data that can be used for information, control and benchmarking purposes. The tool &quot;TEAviisari&quot; (National Institute for Health and Welfare, Finland) is presented as an example from public health practice.Germany&#39;s EU Council Presidency in 2020 - with the topics of digitization and a common health data space, among others - offers the opportunity to make decisive progress in capacity development in municipal health promotion in this country too.
34061213	BACKGROUND: Liver tumors in children are relatively rare, but knowledge of their imaging diagnostics is no less important. Frequency and image morphology of benign and malignant liver masses in children. Preparation of the relevant original articles, reviews and expert recommendations regarding the imaging of liver tumors in children. The most common malignant liver tumors are hepatoblastoma, which mostly occurs in young children, and in some regions also hepatocellular carcinoma. In contrast to some benign masses, such as focal nodular hyperplasia, simple cysts or steatosis areas, their image morphology is not very characteristic. Radiologically, sonography and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are usually used. Both methods benefit from intravenous contrast medium administration. Liver tumors in children have a broad morphological spectrum. Some entities can be characterized using imaging, some require multimodal imaging or histological assessment. In addition to the image morphological criteria, age, laboratory parameters and anamnesis also play an important role in making the diagnosis.
34061214	CLINICAL PROBLEM: Imaging is crucial for differentiating an interstitial edematous form of acute pancreatitis from a necrotizing form of acute pancreatitis and its local complications in terms of treatment choice and disease progression. According to the revised Atlanta classification of 2012, patients diagnosed with acute pancreatitis are clinically classified as having a mild, moderate or severe course of the disease. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are established imaging techniques for diagnosing and monitoring acute pancreatitis and its complications. Within the framework of the revised Atlanta classification, CT and MRI allow interstitial edematous pancreatitis to be reliably distinguished from necrotizing pancreatitis. This differentiation goes hand in hand with the nomenclatural correct classification of local early and late complications in CT and MRI. RECOMMENDATION FOR PRACTICE: The following article uses case studies to address the crucial CT and MRI imaging criteria for the correct classification and description of findings in acute pancreatitis and its local complications.
34061221	In urological implant surgery for erectile dysfunction and stress urinary incontinence, the correct selection of patients plays a crucial role in the subsequent success of the treatment. By making an indication in accordance with guidelines, scientifically documented satisfaction rates of &gt; 90% are generally achieved for both penile implants and artificial sphincters. Depending on the type of evaluation, however, between 5 and 30% of patients are not satisfied with the result of their operation. In this context, the proper information of the patient before a corresponding surgical procedure in urological prosthetics plays a key role. A realistic assessment of the possible complications and risks must be made and, in particular, unrealistic expectations of the patient must be corrected. Good communication with the patient is an essential prerequisite for this. The likelihood of complications and thus subsequent dissatisfaction is significantly increased, especially in the case of revision surgery or patients with risk factors. The involvement of the partner also plays a major role in subsequent patient satisfaction in the area of ​​urological implant surgery. Finally, there is a group of patients who are at particularly high risk of later dissatisfaction. These are patients with compulsive/obsessive behavior, with unrealistic expectations, after revision surgery, with a high level of entitlement, as well as those patients who deny the real facts of their illness, visit multiple surgeons, or have psychiatric illnesses (referred to as CURSED patients).
34061224	BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Aniseikonia as a possible cause of asthenopic complaints is often neglected in modern cataract surgery. The aim of this study is to provide the clinician with a simple calculation model with which the image scale of the pseudophakic eye can be estimated. The calculation scheme for the image scale of the pseudophakic eye refers to the formula-based (vergence-based) calculation of the intraocular lens using theoretical-optical formulas. From the biometric quantities that are usually available for both eyes when calculating the lens, the image scale for objects at infinity or at a finite measuring distance can be determined from the vergences in front of and behind the 3 or 4 refractive interfaces in the pseudophakic eye model. In the formula-based calculation, a pseudophakic eye model with 3 or 4 refractive interfaces (postoperative spectacle refraction; thin cornea, described by the front surface, or thick cornea, described by the front and back surfaces; intraocular lens) is defined and the vergence in front of and behind each interface is determined using the methods of linear optics. The quotient of the product of the vergences in front of the interfaces and the product of the vergences immediately behind the interfaces directly describes the image scale of the eye. The retinal image size difference can be determined directly from the comparison of the image scale of both eyes. This is shown using the Haigis and Hoffer Q formula (3 surfaces) and the Castrop formula (4 surfaces) as examples. If biometry and lens calculation are carried out on both eyes when planning the cataract operation, the image scale in both eyes can be determined using simple means and the aniseikonia of the pseudophakic patient can be determined from the comparison of both eyes. Such an assessment should become an integral part of the lens calculation in order to detect possible asthenopic complaints after cataract surgery at an early stage.
34061241	The treatment of inguinal hernias using open and minimally invasive procedures has reached a high standard in terms of results over the past 30 years. However, there is still a need for a further reduction in postoperative seromas, chronic pain and recurrence. This video article shows the endoscopic anatomy of the groin with regard to robotic transabdominal preperitoneal patchplasty (r‑TAPP) and illustrates the surgical steps of r‑TAPP in a video. The results of a cohort study of 302 consecutive hernias that were operated on using r‑TAPP are presented and discussed in terms of the added value of the robotic technology - also in further training. r‑TAPP is the natural development of conventional TAPP and has the potential to become a new standard as equipment availability increases and material costs are reduced. Future studies will also have to refine the versatile added value of r‑TAPP with new parameters.
34062565	Osteoprotection in prostate cancer patients plays a role not only in the bone metastasized castration-resistant (mCRPC) situation. Osteoprotection is also recommended in the bone metastasized hormone-sensitive stage (mHSPC) and generally as an accompaniment to androgen deprivation therapy (ADT). This study aims to demonstrate the reality of the application of the various types of osteoprotection in metastatic prostate cancer in Germany. An online questionnaire consisting of 16 questions to record the reality of treatment in Germany was developed and sent to members of the Oncology and Urologic Oncology Working Groups (AKO/AUO) as well as to colleagues at the Urology Clinic of the University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein (Lübeck Campus), the Braunschweig Hospital and the Technical University of Munich. With the help of the current study situation, specialist information and guidelines, decision paths were also developed for bone metastasized prostate cancer and for ADT-induced bone loss. In summary, the analysis showed that osteoprotection is routine in osseous mCRPC. In osseous mHSPC, however, osteoprotection is less frequently indicated and is even less used to reduce ADT-induced bone loss. Denosumab is used more frequently than zoledronic acid. The decision paths presented illustrate the different dosage and application regimens in the various stages of metastatic prostate cancer. Osteoprotection in prostate cancer is multifaceted and not just limited to osseous mCRPC. Osteoprotective measures are an important component in the holistic treatment concept of metastatic prostate cancer.
34062582	Combined hormonal contraceptives (CC) significantly increase the risk of VTE. With the exception of the 3-month injection, progestogen-only preparations are not associated with an increased risk of VTE and can be used in women with a previous VTE or thrombophilic risk factors who wish to use hormonal contraception. Before prescribing hormonal contraception, the risk of VTE should be carefully assessed. A corresponding checklist can be found on the BfArM website. Routine testing for hereditary thrombophilia is not recommended. Oral anticoagulants cross the placenta and are generally embryotoxic, and therefore require the use of reliable contraception. A common side effect of oral anticoagulant therapy is the occurrence of hypermenorrhea. Hormonal contraception can also be continued with a combination preparation if anticoagulation is already in place, provided that the switch to an estrogen-free form of contraception takes place at least 6 weeks before the end of anticoagulation. VTE that has occurred in women using hormonal contraceptives is considered to be provoked events. The risk of recurrence of hormone-associated VTE is low after stopping anticoagulation and switching to an estrogen-free form of contraception, so an anticoagulation period of 3-6 months is usually sufficient. After hormone-associated VTE, drug-based VTE prophylaxis is recommended during a future pregnancy and in the postpartum period.
34062583	With the increasing prevalence of continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) systems, time in range (TIR) ​​is becoming increasingly important as a parameter for optimizing blood sugar control in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus. Recently, evidence has been shown of improved prevention of cardiovascular events and pregnancy complications in patients with optimized TIR. In addition to TIR, it is recommended to measure time below range (TBR) in order to also record hypoglycemia as a clinically relevant event. HYPOGLYCEMICS: Hypoglycemia remains a clinically relevant complication of type 1 diabetes mellitus therapy. With the approval of nasal glucagon, there is now an option as an easy-to-use emergency therapy compared to the classic injection. With the development of the glucagon analogue dasiglucagon, which is stable in liquid form, a classic emergency pen with a ready-to-use solution may also be available in the near future. The new fast-acting insulin aspart (FIASP) offers new opportunities for optimizing blood sugar levels in type 1 diabetes patients. In addition, the first hybrid closed-loop system for the treatment of type 1 diabetes mellitus was approved in Germany in 2019. This system automatically adjusts the basal rate based on the blood sugar measured by CGM. Due to the continued need for bolus administration and the complexity of the technology, careful selection and adequate training of patients treated with such a system remains essential. When used appropriately, a hybrid closed-loop system enables improved control of blood sugar levels, particularly at night. COMPLEMENTARY THERAPIES: Since 2019, the SGLT-2 inhibitor dapagliflozin and the combined SGLT-1/2 inhibitor sotagliflozin have been approved for the treatment of inadequately controlled type 1 diabetics with a BMI of over 27 kg/m² and without a risk constellation for diabetic ketoacidosis. The most relevant side effect is atypical normoglycemic ketoacidosis, which is why an initial risk assessment and appropriate training of the patient in the performance and interpretation of ketone body and pH measurements during therapy are of central importance.
34062584	From a gastroenterological point of view, in addition to determining liver enzymes, the investigation of possible fibrosis using non-invasive techniques is of great importance. Measurement using transient elastography (e.g. using FibroScan) is particularly worth mentioning here. If the FibroScan value is ≥ 7.1 kPa, a detailed hepatological evaluation should follow, and therapy can be discussed as part of ongoing studies. One tenth of pediatric Pi*ZZ patients have cholestatic liver disease. After adult liver disease was neglected for a long time, its extent has recently been better assessed using non-invasive techniques. In adulthood, one fifth to one third of Pi*ZZ subjects develop liver fibrosis. Even in the heterozygous form (Pi*MZ), AATM is considered a &quot;disease modifier&quot;; the Pi*SZ genotype represents an intermediate risk compared to Pi*MZ and Pi*ZZ. In the presence of relevant risk factors such as diabetes mellitus, obesity (BMI &gt; 30 kg/m <sup>2</sup> ) and age &gt; 50 years, it predisposes to the development of liver disease. Patients with NAFLD/NASH or critical alcohol consumption who also have AATM have a significantly increased risk of developing liver cirrhosis. OUTLOOK AND FUTURE THERAPIES: There is currently no drug therapy for liver involvement in AATM. Some drugs against the progression of liver fibrosis are in promising phase II/III trials. Of particular note is the inhibition of alpha-1 antitypsin (AAT) production using siRNA, for which there is initial evidence of effectiveness. On the other hand, a drug is in clinical testing that attempts to increase Z-AAT secretion into the bloodstream.
34062585	DISTURBED SLEEP IN DEMENTIA: Almost everyone with dementia has disturbed sleep. The spectrum of sleep disorders is very broad. The treatment of sleep disorders in dementia patients is initially non-pharmacological. The evidence for pharmacotherapy is very low and only proven for sustained-release melatonin and trazodone. TREATMENT OF SLEEP DISORDERS IN PATIENTS WITH DEMENTIA: In addition to general measures with optimal treatment of comorbidities, behavioral therapy is very important. Medications for the treatment of sleep disorders can be prescribed with a clear objective, but should be checked again and again to see whether the prescription is necessary. The active search for and treatment of sleep disorders should always be carried out in dementia patients.
34062586	In people with HIV, the risk of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (HIV-NHL) or Hodgkin lymphoma (HIV-HL) is increased by 10-20 and 5-15 times, respectively, even with combined antiretroviral therapy. Important risk factors are the CD4 cell nadir and the cumulative HIV viral load. The prognosis is determined by the pathological subtype and the International Prognosis Index, as well as by the number of CD4 cells at lymphoma diagnosis and by molecular markers such as the expression of MYC or BCL2. The standard treatment for diffuse large B-cell lymphoma is 6 cycles of R-CHOP. Patients with Burkitt lymphoma receive treatment according to the B-ALL/NHL protocol of GMALL. No standard treatment has been established for plasmablastic lymphoma; the treatment of choice is CHOP or EPOCH plus bortezomib. The prognosis for patients with primary effusion lymphoma remains poor. In small case series, relatively good results were achieved with DA-EPOCH ± bortezomib. Whole brain irradiation is obsolete in patients with HIV and primary CNS lymphoma. Protocols with HD-MTX are feasible and effective. Hodgkin lymphoma: stage-adapted therapy with ABVD and/or BEACOPP basis. In patients with relapsed or refractory disease, high-dose chemotherapy with autologous stem cell transplantation is used. There are also numerous case reports of successful therapy with nivolumab or pembrolizumab. The relapse rate after complete remission is around 11% in patients with NHL. The standard therapy is autologous stem cell transplantation, provided patients are suitable. Therapy with CAR-T cells should not be withheld from HIV patients.
34062587	Cell-based methods (e.g. LTT, ELISPOT) should not be used to diagnose Lyme disease. A recent randomized controlled study has confirmed that doxycycline and beta-lactam antibiotics can be used equally well. There are no statistically significant differences in neurological symptoms after treatment and side effects. Accordingly, the S3 guideline for neuroborreliosis does not recommend any drug as a preferred option. Several studies with patients with neuroborreliosis treated with antibiotics show no increased rate of fatigue in the long term compared to healthy control subjects. Likewise, there is no difference in quality of life, depression and cognition between patients with neuroborreliosis after antibiotic therapy and healthy control subjects in the long term.: PROPHYLAXIS: Prophylactic antibiotic administration after a tick bite is currently not recommended in Germany.
34062588	CHARACTERISTICS AND CAUSES OF PRE-HOSPITAL AND IN-HOSPITAL CARDIOVASCULAR ARREST: A large Danish study compared the characteristics of more than 12,000 patients with pre-hospital and in-hospital cardiac arrest. Interestingly, the two groups had similar demographics and a similar number of pre-existing conditions. The results suggest that differences can be explained primarily by the characteristics of the cardiac arrest. This is particularly interesting in view of the currently insufficient study situation on in-hospital cardiac arrest. CARDIOVASCULAR ARREST IN THE INTENSIVE CARE UNIT: Around half of in-hospital cardiac arrests occur in the intensive care unit. Two recently published studies looked in more detail at the occurrence, causes and prognosis of patients with cardiac arrest in the intensive care unit. COVID-19 AND ITS IMPACT ON IN-HOSPITAL CARDIOVASCULAR ARREST: Several studies have shown a higher incidence of pre-hospital cardiac arrests with a worse prognosis during the COVID-19 pandemic. It is currently unclear how often hospitalized patients with COVID-19 suffer in-hospital cardiac arrest. Published studies have shown a very limited probability of survival. The leading cause was predominantly hypoxic-triggered cardiac arrest with non-shockable ECG rhythms (asystole/PEA). A cardiac cause was rarely found. Due to the poor prognosis, some authors even discussed the usefulness of resuscitation measures in COVID-19 patients.
34062589	Stressful experiences in childhood and adolescence increase the risk of diabetes mellitus type II, coronary heart disease and strokes throughout life. Optimism, a sense of purpose/determination and mindfulness are shown to be possible protective factors for cardiovascular health. In Germany, the randomized, controlled TEACH multicenter study is currently testing the effectiveness of a team-based treatment (“Blended Collaborative Care”) in secondary prevention in psychologically stressed patients with coronary heart disease. Therapies based on positive psychology and mindfulness training can lead to a significant reduction in anxiety, stress and depression in heart patients.
34062590	SECONDARY HYPERTENSION: In 2016, recommendations for action on primary hyperaldosteronism were published in an international guideline, which was expanded in 2018 specifically from a European perspective. The aim is to detect the relevant patients at an early stage in order to prevent end-organ damage and cardiovascular events. If atherosclerotic renal artery stenosis is suspected, color-coded duplex sonography of the kidneys and renal arteries is a suitable screening test according to the guidelines. Treatment is primarily drug-based. OBSTRUCTIVE SLEEP APNEA SYNDROME: Protrusion splints have a comparable moderate effect on high blood pressure as the previously established positive pressure ventilation. They are better tolerated by patients. THERAPY-RESISTANT HYPERTENSION - CONSERVATIVE TREATMENT OPTIONS: In therapy-resistant hypertension, spironolactone is recommended as the fourth drug. The additional intake of patiromer results in fewer cases of hyperkalemia, particularly in patients with chronic kidney disease, which makes it possible to safely administer spironolactone. THERAPY-RESISTANT HYPERTENSION – INTERVENTIONAL TREATMENT OPTIONS: Renal denervation can lead to a significant reduction in blood pressure in the first few months after the intervention, but this is much more moderate than initial studies suggested.
34062591	TOBACCO CESSATION IN THE CLINIC – OPS 9–501 TOBACCO CESSATION: In the hospital, effective withdrawal can be organized through discussions, pharmacological help and, above all, continued care in outpatient structures. Medical associations strive to ensure adequate funding in the DRG system. PHARMACOLOGICAL SUPPORT: Pharmacological support, including with varenicline, is effective and safe. GOLD STANDARD: CONVERSATIONS PLUS PHARMACOTHERAPY: Conversations plus pharmacotherapy are more effective than any therapy alone. TOBACCO CESSATION IN THE EVENT OF MANIFEST DISEASES: For the main tobacco-associated diseases such as coronary heart disease or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, positive effects on morbidity and mortality have been confirmed by high-quality meta-analyses. SEVERE COURSE OF COVID-19 IN SMOKERS: Smoking is a significant risk factor for coronavirus infection and a severe course of the disease. E-CIGARETTE FOR TOBACCO QUITTING?: The data on long-term toxic effects and the long-term effectiveness of e-cigarettes in smoking cessation are still unclear. Dual use is common. The e-cigarette cannot therefore still be recommended for smoking cessation.
34062592	The gold standard in the diagnosis of ILD in rheumatic diseases remains high-resolution, non-contrast-enhanced HRCT. Reliable biomarkers for CTD-ILDs are not yet available for everyday clinical use. The clinical and instrumental findings almost always allow a reliable diagnosis to be made. Histological confirmation is only necessary in unclear cases. An interesting diagnostic option in the future could be the molecular diagnosis of lung parenchyma. MTX is no longer considered a risk factor for the development of chronic ILD or pulmonary fibrosis in RA. More recent data indicate that MTX can even prevent or at least delay the development of ILD in RA. Studies in patients with SSc showed evidence of a positive influence of tocilizumab on the course of ILD with stabilization of the forced vital capacity in the lung function test. However, the primary endpoint of the studies - improvement in the modified Rodnan skin score - was not achieved. Nintedanib was recently approved for the treatment of adults with SSc-ILD and in patients with chronic PF-ILD in various underlying diseases (including RA).
34062594	In a 67-year-old patient with upper abdominal pain, a CT scan revealed a partially calcified swelling of the pancreatic head and a thickening of the duodenum wall. The physical examination findings obtained during the inpatient period were unremarkable. Laboratory tests revealed elevated pancreatic enzymes (amylase 210 U/l (normal range: 28–100 U/l), lipase 2115 U/l (normal range: 23–300 U/l)) and inflammation values ​​(CRP 11.7 mg/l (normal range: &lt; 5.0 mg/l)), otherwise largely unremarkable laboratory parameters. During esophagogastroduodenoscopy, a biopsy was taken of swollen, partially stenosing mucosal areas in the duodenum. Histology revealed partial erosive duodenitis, but no evidence of a malignant tumor. If chronic calcifying pancreatitis was suspected, a sonographically guided percutaneous biopsy of the pancreatic head was performed to exclude tumors. Post-biopsy, the patient developed abdominal pain and temporary circulatory instability with nausea/vomiting as well as a drop in Hb to 7.5 g/dl (normal range: 12.3–15.3 g/dl). The sonographically raised suspicion of a retroperitoneal hematoma was confirmed by CT. The cause was bleeding from a perforation of the right renal artery, which was stopped by immediate angiographic intervention with a covered stent. After a percutaneous biopsy, a vascular perforation must always be considered. A CT provides a reliable and rapid diagnosis. The minimally invasive percutaneous insertion of a covered stent is the treatment of choice in the case of a renal artery that is accessible to stents.
34076782	BACKGROUND: Nonopioid analgesics are used for perioperative analgesia in many patients. There is sometimes little information from studies on some practical questions regarding the use of nonopioid analgesics, and hospitals often do not have concepts for procedures, e.g. patient information and the timing of perioperative administration. A group of experts from the participating professional societies has developed consensus-based recommendations on the perioperative use of nonopioid analgesics and adopted them in a structured formal consensus process. The working group agrees that nonopioid analgesics should be part of a perioperative multimodal analgesia concept and that patients should be informed preoperatively about the benefits, risks and alternative treatment options. Preoperative patient information and education should also include a pain and analgesic history, and patients with risk factors for severe pain and chronic pain should be identified. Taking contraindications into account, non-opioid analgesics can be given pre- or intraoperatively, depending on the duration of the operation, in order to achieve sufficient plasma concentrations after the end of the anesthesia. Non-opioid analgesics or combinations of (non-opioid) analgesics should only be given for a limited period of time. A jointly developed cross-departmental treatment standard with the non-opioid analgesic of choice, other treatment options and adequate dosages, supplemented by procedure-specific concepts, should be documented in writing. Upon discharge from hospital, the doctor providing follow-up treatment should receive written information on analgesics given perioperatively and those currently being taken. Patients should be informed about possible side effects of the analgesics and their symptoms, which can also occur after hospital discharge, and the limited duration of use. The use of non-opioid analgesics should be documented in writing in a cross-departmental treatment standard as part of a perioperative multimodal analgesia concept with clear specifications on indications, contraindications, dosages and duration of treatment.
34076783	BACKGROUND: The treatment of patients with chronic pain represents a global health and socioeconomic challenge. The Center for Pain Medicine (ZSM) Nottwil offers individual, multimodal, interdisciplinary pain therapy in the sense of the biopsychosocial disease model. This study represents a &quot;real-life&quot; analysis that aimed to analyze the patients treated at the ZSM, the treatments performed and the long-term effects of the therapy. In a retrospective cohort study, all data from patients who had a first presentation at the ZSM in 2011 were analyzed. Three years after the first presentation, a randomly selected sample was examined for a follow-up measurement regarding the effectiveness of the therapy. The main outcome was the general well-being of the patients. In 2011, 628 patients had a first presentation at the ZSM. The cohort showed low general well-being and high pain-related impairment. 170 participants were included in the follow-up survey (follow-up group), with 46 data sets (responders) being evaluated for the final analysis. The responders and nonresponders in the follow-up group showed significant differences in the basic characteristics regarding mental health-related quality of life (SF-12) and anxiety and depression (HADS). In the long term, the multimodal therapy at the ZSM showed an improvement in general well-being, physical well-being, pain-related impairment and pain intensity. Pain freedom was achieved in 30%. Based on the available results, multimodal pain therapy is effective in the treatment of chronic pain. This effect was demonstrated for the first time in an unselected patient collective and for individually adapted, predominantly outpatient, multimodal pain therapy. The low response rate to the follow-up survey and the differences between the responders in the initial values ​​(anxiety, depression, mental quality of life) limit the interpretation.
34077947	Objective: The aim of the present study was to understand the molecular mechanism underlying the therapeutic effect of Qi Ling (QL) on androgen-independent prostate cancer. Methods: The relative expression of TRIM66 in prostate tumor cells was analyzed by microarray. The transcript level and protein expression of TRIM66, HP1γ, AR, c-Myc and GAPDH were determined using quantitative real-time PCR and Western blot. Cell proliferation and apoptosis were analyzed using the cell counting method Kit-8 (CCK-8) and flow cytometry. The regulatory effect of c-Myc on TRIM66 was analyzed using the luciferase reporter plasmid and direct binding was detected by chromatin immunoprecipitation. Secretory prostate-specific antigen was quantified by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Results: TRIM66 was aberrantly overexpressed in prostate cancer and associated with poor prognosis. TRIM66/HP1γ/AR was upregulated during androgen-independent transition in hormone-free medium. TRIM66 levels were positively associated with cell proliferation and negatively associated with apoptosis of androgen-independent prostate cancer cells. QL treatment resulted in specific inhibition of c-Myc and, through binding to its promoter, downregulation of TRIM66. Ectopic insertion of TRIM66 significantly abolished the antitumor effects of QL in androgen-independent prostate cancer. Conclusion: Our study revealed the importance of downregulated TRIM66/HP1γ/AR signaling in mediating the antitumor properties of QL.
34077975	Due to digitalization, the Internet has become an essential information medium for patients. Patients with sudden hearing loss have a particularly great need for information due to uncertain scientific findings. In this study, the results of an Internet search on the topic of sudden hearing loss were therefore examined. The first 30 hits of a Google search with the term “sudden hearing loss” were categorized, a readability statistic was calculated using various formulas (Flesch Reading Ease Score; 0=difficult, 100=easy to read) and incorrect information was documented. A structured content assessment was carried out using the DISCERN questionnaire (1=low, 5=high quality) separately by 2 blinded examiners. Compliance with recommended standards was recorded using a Health-On-The-Net certification. 18 websites (60.0%) were information portals, 7 (23.3%) from medical device companies (including 3 hearing aid manufacturers), 2 (6.7%) from public institutions and 1 each (3.3%) from a medical association and a self-help organization, as well as a scientific article. The average word count was 1307.0±840.2 words, the last update was 17.1±32.5 months ago and the Flesch Reading Ease Score was 36.1±13.9. The scientific article was the most difficult to read (13.7). Overall, the DISCERN was 2.2±0.7 with the worst rating from medical device companies (1.6±0.5). Two websites (6.7%) had a Health-On-The-Net certificate, 14 (46.7%) showed incorrect information. Patient information on the Internet should be critically evaluated due to poor readability, potential conflicts of interest, low quality or incorrect information. One possible consequence would be the provision of reliable health information on the Internet by medical service providers and professional associations.
34081156	For the pandemic caused by coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), the rapid and widespread availability of reliable diagnostic tests is an important prerequisite for being able to detect and manage it. From the beginning of 2020, the capacity for diagnostic tests had to be quickly planned, built up and constantly expanded. With specialists in laboratory medicine as well as in microbiology, virology and infectious disease epidemiology, the German health system has medical expertise and experience in diagnostics, both technically and organizationally. The experiences with the challenges in the first year of the pandemic are presented in this article.
34081174	SURGICAL OBJECTIVE: To describe a reproducible surgical technique for single-strand anterolateral reconstruction of the posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) based on a septum-preserving approach. This technique is less traumatic than the transseptal approach. The article illustrates the surgical steps to simplify the technical aspects of the procedure. A complete, third-degree and symptomatic PCL rupture, associated with a feeling of instability and frequent complaints (deceleration, climbing stairs) or subsequent gonalgia originating from the medial compartment or patellofemoral joint. Injury to the peripheral joint stabilizers adjacent to the PCL including the posterolateral zone or a complete medial knee injury. The procedure is indicated in chronic cases, but also in acute posterior instability &gt; 10 mm if there is an intraligamentary rupture with dislocated PCL stumps. Bony PCL tears that can be refixed, severe soft tissue damage, infection, advanced gonarthrosis. After diagnostic arthroscopy of the knee joint, the ipsilateral semitendinosus and gracilis tendons are removed as a 6-fold graft for PCL reconstruction. Creation of a high anterolateral arthroscopy portal and additional working portals: deep anterolateral, anteromedial and posteromedial. Single-strand PCL replacement with hybrid fixation of the graft is performed by creating a femoral and a tibial drill channel. Partial weight bearing 20 kg for 6 weeks. PCL orthosis with tibial support 12 weeks postoperatively. Flexion limited to 30° for the first 2 weeks, then 60° for 2 weeks, then 90° for a further 2 weeks. Passive flexion in the prone position is performed. Training of the active-dynamic knee joint stabilizers starts from the 7th postoperative week. It is recommended not to resume recreational and competitive sports until strength and coordination have been fully restored, at the earliest 9–12 months postoperatively. Two isolated and 19 combined PCL injuries were treated. The average patient age was 27.4 years and the minimum follow-up was 12 months. After PCL replacement, we found good clinical results on average with little posterior knee joint laxity (4.1 mm) compared to the healthy opposite side. During the follow-up examination, no patient showed clinical joint effusion. The mobility of the operated knee joint was fully restored in 19 of 21 cases. One patient suffered a graft failure, which was noticeable by continued posterior instability and persistent symptoms.
34081175	SURGICAL GOAL: Anatomical reduction of dislocated fractures using a locking hook plate. Surgical revision of symptomatic pseudarthrosis with the aim of achieving bony union. Dislocated fractures of the ulnar styloid process involving the fovea ulnaris. Combined fractures with instability of the distal radioulnar joint and symptomatic pseudarthrosis. Undislocated fractures of the ulnar styloid process and asymptomatic pseudarthrosis. Dorsoradial access to the distal ulna between the 6th extensor tendon compartment and the tendon of the flexor carpi ulnaris. Exposure of the fracture/pseudarthrosis. In the case of a pseudarthrosis, clear out and freshen up the fracture ends. Repositioning is carried out using the hooks of the plate, if necessary additional deposition of autologous spongiosa in the case of pseudarthrosis. Fixation of the plate using the sliding hole and subsequent filling of the angle-stable screw holes. Depending on the accompanying injury, immobilization in a forearm plaster cast for 1 to 2 weeks. Active movement exercises of the fingers from the first postoperative day, if necessary lymphatic drainage. After bone formation, weight bearing is increased under occupational therapy supervision. Bone healing was achieved in 100% of our cases. Surgical treatment of both symptomatic pseudarthrosis and dislocated fractures of the ulnar styloid process using an angle-stable hook plate has proven to be effective.
34081176	SURGICAL GOAL: The treatment of isolated retropatellar cartilage defects with the currently used gel-based regenerative methods requires the gel to be deposited on the subchondral bone under gravity, hence arthroscopy in the prone position. Isolated, retropatellar-limited cartilage damage, at least 2.5 cm <sup>2</sup> . Age under 40 years, epiphyseal closure, ICRS (International Cartilage Repair Society) lesion grade 3 and 4. Cartilage damage in the medial or lateral femorotibial compartment, in the trochlea area, with degenerative genesis, rheumatoid arthritis, local infection, patellar malalignment, femoropatellar dysplasia, knee instability, knee malalignment &gt;3°, &quot;kissing lesions&quot;. Two-stage procedure, first arthroscopic removal of chondrocytes. Second step: Positioning in the prone position, fixation of the leg with a thigh tourniquet in the leg holder, removal of the leg section from the operating table. The foot was hung in a loop to prevent hyperextension in the knee joint. Two lateral portals were created. Visualization and debridement of the lesion, removal of intra-articular fluid. A loop passed behind the ligamentum patellae using a lasso was used to suspend a weight in order to expand the femoropatellar space. After drying the defect area, NOVOCART® Inject (TETEC, Reutlingen) was applied. 15 minutes were allowed for the cells to adhere, then the surgical procedure was completed. Extension splint for 6 weeks. Passive movement with CPM (“continuous passive motion”) splint with gradual increase in flexion until the full range of motion was achieved in the 6th week. Full weight bearing was permitted in the extension position as soon as tolerated by the patient. Clinical follow-up examinations were performed routinely after 3, 6 and 12 months. The mean age (n = 5) at the time of surgery was 23 ± 6 (14–30) years, the mean follow-up time was 28 ± 7 (20–40) months. All patients returned to normal activity levels without any limitation of knee movement. Clinically Kujala score 90 ± 12, Lysholm score 95 ± 5 points. All MRI examinations showed a filled defect, Mocart score 63 ± 7 points. Cartilage at the repaired site was inhomogeneous and hyperintense. Patellar mobility under 10 N reached 21 ± 4 mm medially and 15 ± 2 mm laterally. On the healthy side, the medial displacement was 22 ± 4 mm and the lateral displacement was 19 ± 3 mm.
34081187	BACKGROUND: The COVID-19 pandemic requires extensive measures in nursing homes with the aim of preventing infection. These measures affect the lives of residents and lead, among other things, to an increase in depression and other negative side effects. The aim of the study is to explore the experiences and perspectives of nursing home residents with depressive symptoms during the pandemic. 9 guideline-based interviews were conducted with residents, which were evaluated using Kuckartz&#39;s content-structuring content analysis. Three main themes were identified: feelings and emotions in relation to the pandemic, changes and restrictions due to the measures, and wishes against the background of the pandemic. The residents surveyed report both emotional stress and not being afraid of infection and its consequences. In addition, the respondents sometimes express unpleasant restrictions such as wearing masks, the usefulness of which they sometimes critically question. Furthermore, various wishes of the residents in relation to the pandemic, such as leaving the nursing home, are identified. The study shows complex feelings, changes and wishes among nursing home residents due to the pandemic and the resulting measures. This requires an individual approach to residents with depressive symptoms in order to avoid an increase in mental health problems. Against this background, there is a need for a participatory implementation of health protection measures among the particularly vulnerable group of nursing home residents.
34086058	GOAL: The SARS-CoV‑2 pandemic has been threatening health for over a year now and is affecting the daily work of ENT doctors in Germany. The follow-up data from an initial web-based survey are presented with regard to differences between the first and second wave of SARS-CoV‑2 infections. In contrast to the first survey (April to May 2020), in which all ENT doctors - regardless of infection status - were invited to participate, in the follow-up survey (June 2020 to February 2021) only infected colleagues were invited to participate. Personal data on the course of the disease, symptoms, place of work, but also information on the cause of infection, availability of protective materials and perceived safety were requested via email from the German Society for Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery (DGHNO KHC) and the German Professional Association of Otorhinolaryngologists (BVHNO). Since the beginning of the pandemic, 129 ENT physicians have been infected with SARS-CoV-2. The relative risk for ENT physicians was 4.07 (95% confidence interval, 95% CI: 3.20; 5.19) during the first wave and fell to 0.35 (95% CI: 0.28; 0.45) during the second wave. Personal protective equipment was available in sufficient quantities during the second wave, whereas many participants felt a lack of it during the first wave. The confirmed chains of infection between the first and second waves showed differences. During the first wave, transmission by infected staff played a major role. In the second wave, the focus of infection transmission was contact with COVID-19 patients and infected family members. Regular medical activities were resumed by hospital physicians and general practitioners in the second wave. Nevertheless, there was a proportionally lower infection with SARS-CoV‑2 compared to the German population as a whole. The available data from the only long-term survey among ENT doctors during the pandemic suggest that a return to regular ENT work is possible with consistent observance of personal protective measures. Other strategies to reduce the risk of infection include consistent testing for SARS-CoV‑2 among healthcare workers, patients and the general population, as well as early vaccination for medical high-risk groups.
34086059	Atrial fibrillation (AF) will become one of the greatest challenges in cardiovascular medicine in the foreseeable future. The attempt to improve future patient care requires in particular better early detection of subclinical AF. Digital health solutions that use modern communication technologies to collect and analyze data will play a key role in solving this problem. Several rapidly evolving technologies have already been introduced in the last decade. Although the majority still require external validation, the number of scientific publications is steadily growing; and several randomized, controlled trials are planned. This review article aims to provide an overview of currently available digital health applications with a special focus on so-called &quot;mobile health&quot; (mHealth) solutions and to evaluate their benefits against the background of the available study data.
34086066	BACKGROUND AND QUESTION: Treatment errors involve several problems. Influencing factors include the diseases, the interventions, the types of errors and the consequential damage of the respective treatment processes. The role played by these factors in the reality of care is being determined for the first time in an extended systematic analysis of error events identified by an expert committee. Of 359 assessments by an expert committee from 1999 to 2019, a total of 236 error findings were evaluated with regard to the causes and consequences of errors. In one practice (103/43.6%), errors occurred about twice as often during diagnostics (69/29.3%) as during therapy (34/14.4%). In contrast, errors in a clinic (159/67.4%) occurred almost exclusively during therapy (144/61.0%) and rarely during diagnostics (15/6.4%). Types of errors were in diagnostics: inadequate assessment of findings (112/47.5%), assessment of findings (86/36.4%); in indication: missing reason for intervention (58/24.6%), ignored reason for intervention or counter-reason (33/14.0%); in explanation: inadequate risk information (24/10.2%); in therapy: inadequate intervention technique (59/25.0%), organization (16/6.8%), medication (6/2.5%); in follow-up care: inadequate control (16/8.5%), security information (15/6.3%), crisis management (13/5.5%); in documentation: inadequate (19/8.1%) and/or falsified (4/1.7%) documentation. Direct/primary damages from incorrect treatment were: error-related complications (126/54.7%), Clavien 3/4 (120/50.8%), Clavien 5 (death) (16/6.8%), unnecessary surgery or medication (39/16.5% and 40/16.9%), surgical revisions (83/35.2%), revision with intensive care (33/14.0%), required error corrections elsewhere in a clinic or practice (131/55.1% and 13/5.5%). Indirect/secondary damage caused by errors were: delayed diagnosis/therapy (94/39.8%), loss of function/organ of a kidney (6/2.5% or 7/3.0%), a testicle (2/0.8 or 22/9.3%), a sphincter (14/5.9%), increased/prolonged need for treatment (167/70.8%), prolonged duration of suffering/reduced quality of life (173/73.3%), reduced prospects of recovery/prognosis (45/19.1%). Based on a systematic analysis of assessment cases from two decades, an overview is provided of which diseases and interventions in urology are particularly prone to errors, which types of errors in the treatment process cause which direct and indirect damage caused by errors, and which conclusions can be drawn from this.
34086070	BACKGROUND: Survey by the “Commission for Cross-Sectoral Ophthalmology” as a joint commission of the German Ophthalmological Society (DOG) and the Professional Association of Ophthalmologists in Germany (BVA) on the effects of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic on ophthalmological care in Germany. Online-based survey. A total of 1190 questionnaires were (partially) answered. 69 (5.8%) participants reported their outpatient or consultation hours in the period from March 15 to April 15, 2020 as “unrestricted,” 756 (63.5%) as “reduced,” and 330 (27.7%) as “exclusively emergency care,” regardless of the type of facility. Outpatient operations were reserved for emergency surgical interventions in 68.0% of the main departments, 42.0% of the outpatient departments, 45.0% of the surgical MVZs and group practices, and 33.0% of the individual surgical practices. Inpatient operations were limited to the care of emergencies in 75.0% of the outpatient departments and 71.0% of the main departments. The number of cases of urgent indications and emergencies declined with the exception of endophthalmitis (+8.2%): retinal detachment (−34.8%), bulbar perforation (−7.3%), glaucoma attack (−17.8%), ZAV and AION (−31%), others (−30.9%), penetrating keratoplasty and amniotic membrane transplantation (−59.1%). Institutional or professional policy requirements (76.0%) and appointment cancellations by patients (84.0%) were the most common reasons for restricting ophthalmological care. During the pandemic, there was initially a significant reduction in non-urgent conservative and surgical treatments, affecting all areas of ophthalmology. Due to the intensive care capacity required for COVID-19 patients, inpatient treatments in particular were largely limited to emergencies. Care for ophthalmological patients, including emergencies and urgent treatments, could be maintained across sectors, with a (significant) decrease in the number of cases observed for both groups.
34086072	BACKGROUND: Despite silicone oil endotamponade, complicated retinal detachment can still recur under oil or immediately after removal of the oil tamponade. The aim of this study is to identify risk factors for recurrent detachment and to investigate the functional and anatomical results. Retrospective analysis of patients with primary retinal detachment who underwent pars plana vitrectomy (ppV) with silicone oil tamponade at the University Eye Clinic in Marburg between 2010 and 2015 and subsequently underwent reablation. Two groups were formed: Group 1 had reablation under oil, Group 2 had reablation directly after oil removal. A total of 43 (15.6%) cases were identified, in 22/43 cases (50%) reablation after oil removal and in 21/43 cases (7.6%) reablation under silicone oil tamponade. Proliferative vitreoretinopathy (PVR) was reported as the cause of reablation in 90.6% (39/43) of cases, new foramina were identified in 20.9% (9/43) and persistent foramina in 25.5% (11/43). Vitreoretinal scarring (PVR reactions) was the main risk factor for recurrent retinal detachment. Persistent foramina were also identified as a more common reason. Recurrent retinal detachment represents a significant challenge for both patients and vitreoretinal surgeons, considering the economic and emotional burden of multiple interventions.
