30043826	identify the factors associated with dysphagia in patients undergoing prolonged orotracheal intubation (IOTp) and the post-extubation consequences. 150 patients undergoing IOTp participated in the study, evaluated according to the functional level of swallowing (American Speech Language - Hearing Association National Outcome Measurement System - ASHA NOMS), determination of severity (The Simplified Acute Physiology Score - SOFA) and collection of the following variables: age, mortality, days of orotracheal intubation, number of visits to introduce oral feeding and days to hospital discharge. Patients were grouped according to the ASHA classification: 1 (levels 1 and 2), 2 (levels 3, 4 and 5) and 3 (levels 6 and 7). the analyzes indicated the following variables associated with worse swallowing functionality: age (p&lt;0.001), mortality (p&lt;0.003); days of OTI (p=0.001), number of visits to introduce an oral diet (p&lt;0.001) and days to hospital discharge (p=0.018). Multiple comparisons indicated a significant difference when comparing the ASHA1 and ASHA2 groups in relation to the ASHA3 group. The ASHA1 and ASHA2 groups had a lower SOFA score when compared to the ASHA3 group (p=0.004). Only 20% of patients in the ASHA1 group and 32% of patients in ASHA2 had safe swallowing levels before hospital discharge. the factors associated with dysphagia in patients undergoing OTIp were: age over 55 years and time of orotracheal intubation (longer in cases with worse swallowing functionality). The post-extubation consequences were: increased mortality and length of hospital stay in the presence of dysphagia.
30043827	To understand facilitators and barriers in the use of Supplementary and Alternative Communication (AAC) in the perception of family members/caregivers and speech therapists who work with people using AAC in family, social and therapeutic contexts. Quantitative and qualitative cross-sectional study with 20 speech therapists (GF) and 20 family members and/or caregivers of AAC users (GFC). Data collection was carried out through semi-structured interviews with specific questionnaires for each group, video recorded and transcribed for analysis. The data were categorized, according to criteria of relevance and repetition, into two main thematic axes: barriers and facilitators, containing categories and subcategories. Both groups pointed out as barriers: cost of materials, use of other forms of communication, family member as interpreter, linguistic-cognitive difficulties and acceptance of the use of AAC by users, lack of understanding/knowledge of AAC by family members and inhibition of speech in the perception of family members. Both indicated as facilitators: use of high-technology resources, versatility/availability, family involvement/adherence, contextualized use, importance of the therapeutic environment, team and strategies used. The main interlocutors in the implementation of AAC, professionals or family members, can constitute barriers when they make it difficult for users to exercise their autonomy in communication or facilitators when they encourage and use AAC with users.
30043829	To investigate the performance of Brazilian Portuguese speakers in the Test of Narrative Language and correlate performance in narrative production and comprehension tasks. 140 individuals participated, between 5 and 11 years and 11 months of age with typical language development, divided according to age group. A significant difference was found between the 5-year-old group and all other age groups, as well as for the 6-year-old group when compared to the 8, 9, 10 and 11-year-old group. The 7-year-old group did not differ statistically from the 6- and 8-year-old groups. Half of the 7-year-old group was in the first year and the other half in the second year, which may have contributed to the group&#39;s lack of differentiation with the border age groups. No statistically significant difference was found between the groups from 8 years of age onwards. A positive correlation was observed between comprehension and production performance in the 5, 6 and 7 year old age groups, which did not occur for the other groups. The test differentiated the age groups of 5, 6 and 7 years, which did not occur in the age groups from 8 years onwards. Also, from the age of 8, no correlation was found between narrative production and comprehension, signaling the mastery of both skills from this age group onwards.
30043842	The objective was to identify sources of access to information for decision-making and barriers to the use of scientific journals among Municipal Health Secretaries in the State of Paraná, Brazil. Municipal Health Secretaries from 181 municipalities in the State of Paraná participated in the work in 2014. Interviews were carried out on the frequency and use of resources, to obtain information on scientific evidence related to the use of scientific journals. In general, 40.9% of participants were between 18 and 39 years old (mean 43 ± 10.2; median 42 years), had held the position for less than five years (69.1%), and were male ( 56.4%) and only one in three had a postgraduate degree in public health. The main sources of information used were “non-scientific magazines” (76.2%), “printed/online newspapers” (71.4%)” and “Ministry of Health guidelines” (71.3%). The main barriers reported for the use of scientific journals were “lack of time for reading” (72.9%), “high cost of journals” (69.1%) and “difficulty in identifying the best journals” ( 63.5%). The main sources of access to information used are non-scientific vehicles and guidelines from the Ministry of Health. The use of scientific journals is hampered by lack of time and low familiarity with scientific language. Access to scientific information must be facilitated by using more accessible sources, as well as training managers in the use of free access journals. Such actions can assist in the knowledge of updated evidence among municipal health secretaries.
30043844	This article discusses the formation of thematic health care networks and aims to analyze the potential for optimizing geographic access in the chemotherapy network of the Unified Health System (SUS), in the State of Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil, using of linear programming. This is an ex post facto mathematical modeling study, with analytical objectives and a qualitative-quantitative approach, which used bibliographic and documentary research as collection procedures. The optimization potential was evaluated by the percentage difference between the sum of the distances covered in the network for the current situation and for the optimal solution obtained. Among the results identified in the optimized situation are the reduction of 293,246km (14.4%) in the total monthly distance traveled on the network, corresponding to an average reduction of 13.02km per procedure performed, compared to the current distance covered, to be obtained by redistributing the municipalities of origin and the capabilities to offer procedures by reference services. These results indicate the existence of great optimization potential in the studied network, proving that the use of linear programming can offer technical support to the process of creating new thematic health care networks and optimizing existing ones.
30043845	We analyzed the relationships between two subareas of Public Health - Planning and Evaluation - through a bibliometric study of articles, theses and dissertations, in the period between 1980 and 2016. The global production related to Evaluation surpasses that of Planning, with a marked predominance from mid-2000s. The ability to influence the management of the Health sector seems to drive the dispute between the two sub-areas. It is considered that both have theoretical and methodological resources to overcome their reductions by the instrumental logic of so-called managerialism, and establish themselves as devices for reflection and change.
30043846	This study aimed to identify the therapeutic itineraries of women affected by severe maternal morbidity. This is qualitative, descriptive and exploratory research carried out in a reference university hospital for high-risk pregnancies in the interior of the State of São Paulo, Brazil. 16 women with serious complications during pregnancy, childbirth or postpartum participated. Data were collected through semi-structured interviews, recorded, transcribed and analyzed using Content Analysis. The results show that women, when starting the illness process, follow different trajectories, seeking low and high complexity services, also looking for a neighbor, a pharmacy and the use of self-medication. Obstacles relating to reception, continuity of care, resolution and reference in the health care network stand out. Important critical points were observed in relation to obstetric care, with the pilgrimage for health services, delay in referral and institutional violence, realities experienced by women. The tertiary service was identified as welcoming and effective in providing care. This study allowed the identification of problems that exist throughout the obstetric care chain, and this knowledge allows us to understand how the health system is organized in relation to the care of women with serious maternal complications.
30043847	The objective was to investigate inequalities in the commitment of household income to private spending on dental care in Brazil. Data from 55,970 Brazilian households that participated in the nationwide Family Budget Survey in the period 2008-2009 were analyzed. The impact of private spending on dental care on family income was calculated by dividing the average annual per capita household expenditure by the annual per capita family income and estimated according to four categories: &gt; 0%, ≥ 5%, ≥ 10% and ≥ 20%. The analysis of income commitment was carried out only for households with positive expenditure. Only 2,961 (7%) of households reported positive spending on dental care. Overall, the average annual per capita expenditure was R$42.19 and R$602.47 among those with positive expenditure. The households that have the highest absolute expenditure on dental care are those belonging to urban areas and the richest fifth. On the other hand, the households with the greatest income commitment belong to rural areas and the poorest fifth. Among those who reported positive spending, 55% of households in the poorest fifth committed ≥ 20% of their income to dental care. The percentage is just 6% in the richest group of the population. The poorest households in the richest regions (Central-West, South and Southeast) presented the greatest income losses. Socioeconomic inequalities in spending and income commitment to dental care are evident. The assessment of these inequalities becomes relevant for evaluating and guiding public health policies.
30043849	The current process of work intensification is part of the context of productive transformations in Brazil since the 1990s, leading to changes in the social production of worker exhaustion and the epidemiological profile of workers. Inability to work due to accident and illness is an important indicator of worker exhaustion, and is of interest to the health sector. The study aims to analyze the process of intensification of work and health from the perspective of the health-disease process based on the perception of workers at a car manufacturer in the ABC region, in São Paulo, when asked about the obstacles to returning to work for those with restrictions work due to accident or illness, commonly called “compatible”. We carried out six visits to the factory and twenty interviews with production workers. The data were collected between March 2010 and November 2014. The results reveal, in the social figure of the “compatible”, a fracture exposed by the production process, expressed in practices of work intensification, characterized by the intense pace, densification of work, extension of working hours and stress management; at the same time, they point to the tendency to exclude “compatible” workers from the company. The research contributes to advancing the search for knowledge about work intensification and health, we hope to have provided support for new investigations from the perspective of determining the health-disease process, with the incorporation of workers&#39; experience.
30043850	The objective of this study was to evaluate the palivizumab immunoglobulin use program in the State of São Paulo, Brazil. The evaluation framework proposed by Donabedian was adopted, and the data were discussed based on the recommendations of the Ordinance that regulates the use of palivizumab on a national network and the Manual of Standards and Procedures for Vaccination. The state&#39;s 16 application sites were included, as well as 693 children/mothers enrolled in the program in 2014 (85.1% of the eligible population). To evaluate the structure and process, scores were created that made it possible to classify the application sites as suitable, partially suitable and inadequate, when there were up to 10%, 11-20% and greater than 20% of nonconformities, respectively. To evaluate the results, an association was sought between failure to take palivizumab and the need for hospitalization due to respiratory disease/symptoms, based on point and interval odds ratios, with a 95% confidence interval and a critical p value &lt; 0.05. Of the 11 application stations that had a structure classified as adequate, only two had an adequate process, four had an inadequate process and five were partially adequate. The risk of hospitalization in the ICU due to respiratory disease/symptoms increased by an average of 30% with each failure (p = 0.003; OR = 1.30; 95% CI: 1.09-1.55). It is concluded that having a favorable structure for the immunoglobulin use program in the State of São Paulo did not necessarily result in an adequate process. In general, the structure situation was better than the process situation. The application of all doses of immunoglobulin was relevant for preventing hospitalization due to respiratory disease/symptoms.
30043853	Sexual pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) has been considered strategic and promising in controlling the HIV epidemic globally. However, it is necessary to transpose the knowledge accumulated by effectiveness and demonstration studies to the reality of services and populations most vulnerable to infection, in order to achieve broad coverage of PrEP. A reflection on this challenge is proposed, focusing on two dimensions: prophylaxis users, with an emphasis on the contexts of practices and potential exposure to HIV; the comparative advantages of prophylaxis in relation to other methods and the challenges for protective and safe use; and services, considering the organizational principles that could provide greater success in the offering and incorporation of PrEP, within the scope of combined prevention strategies. We analyzed how some principles - singularity in care, autonomy to choose and non-hierarchization of methods, sexual risk management and scheduling flexibility and complementarity of a multidisciplinary team - can favor the organization of service and care, facilitating the linking and retention of users. Some considerations were made about a relative incompatibility between the existing structure of the services and the Ministry of Health&#39;s guidelines for offering PrEP. It was concluded that the greatest success of PrEP as a public health policy depends on two central aspects: ensuring that services are culturally diverse environments and free from discrimination and the intensification of community interventions, including social networks, in order to reduce inequities in the access to services and PrEP.
30043898	Develop an instrument to assess textual reading comprehension and verify the influence of receptive vocabulary on reading comprehension of typical students in the 3rd, 4th and 5th years of elementary school. All ethical precepts were followed. 69 students from the 3rd, 4th and 5th years participated in the study, with an average age of 8.2, 9.2 and 10 years, respectively, 35 of whom were girls, who had a typical classification in the School Performance Test. Half of the sample took the reading comprehension test using the question and answer method, and the other half took the test using the Cloze technique. All students performed the USP Picture Vocabulary Test with 139 stimuli. The students performed well in receptive vocabulary, despite their low socioeconomic level. Students performed better on explicit questions than on implicit ones. They demonstrated more homogeneous and similar performance between school years in the Cloze technique. No conclusive results were observed regarding the correlation between receptive vocabulary and reading comprehension using both methods. There is evidence of the influence of vocabulary on text reading comprehension, especially in the question and answer method. The developed instrument, including two reading comprehension assessment methods, is efficient for investigating and characterizing textual reading comprehension in typical students in the 3rd, 4th and 5th years, with both methods significantly differentiating students in the 3rd and 5th grades. years.
30043899	To investigate the auditory perception of lay judges regarding the gender of women with Reinke&#39;s edema, related to the degree of edema and the fundamental frequency of the voice. Observational, analytical and cross-sectional study. 46 lay judges participated and analyzed 48 dysphonic voices - 24 voices of women with Reinke&#39;s Edema (Reinke&#39;s Edema Group - GER) and 24 voices of women and men with other types of dysphonia (Control Group - CG). The judges analyzed the count of numbers from 1 to 10 and judged the voices as belonging to a man or a woman, in addition to also describing whether they were certain or uncertain about the answer. The REE results were associated with the Degree of Edema (1, 2 or 3) and the average fundamental frequency (F0), analyzed using the vowel /Ɛ/. It was observed that the percentage of errors regarding gender was higher in the GER when compared to the CG, the percentage of certainty regarding gender was higher in the CG. In the GER, grade 1 edema caused fewer errors when compared to grades 2 and 3. The mean F0 of women whose voices were judged as male (141 Hz) was lower than those correctly identified (149 Hz). Through evaluation by lay judges, the voices of women with Reinke&#39;s edema are identified as male voices. The increase in the degree of edema and the reduction in F0 are related to the greater number of errors and/or doubts regarding the identification of the gender of women with Reinke&#39;s edema.
30043900	report a series of cases of robotic bariatric surgery in the treatment of obesity in Brazil. patients undergoing robotic bariatric surgery at the Garrido Institute were evaluated, and a comparison was made with a group undergoing conventional laparoscopic surgery. 45 patients were analyzed, with an average age of 39.44 years, 34 of whom were female, with an initial average BMI of 41.26 kg/m2. Among the surgeries performed, 91.11% were Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, while 8.89% were sleeve gastrectomy. The average total surgery time was 158 (±56.54) minutes, with an average docking time of 7.93 (±3.9) minutes and console time of 113.0 (±41.4) minutes. The average pain presented during post-anesthesia recovery was 2.61 (±3.30) points, on a scale of 0 to 10, with four patients showing mild signs of nausea, responding well to drug treatment. Only one patient required admission to the ICU for a period of two days after surgery, due to previous heart disease. In two cases, incisional hernias occurred at the trocar site, which were treated surgically, without subsequent complications. When comparing robotic versus laparoscopic surgery groups, 45 patients were selected for each group. Operative time was significantly longer using the robotic route, with most other variables being equivalent, including postoperative control of comorbidities. robotic bariatric surgery is a safe procedure, with results comparable to laparoscopic surgery.
30043901	identify doctors&#39; knowledge regarding intra-abdominal hypertension and abdominal compartment syndrome and compare it with the management established in the literature. descriptive, observational, cross-sectional quantitative study. 38 doctors were interviewed using a self-administered questionnaire consisting of objective questions. The study was carried out in a tertiary reference university hospital, located in Curitiba, Paraná. the average age of the participants was 28 years old, 60.5% were female and the average length of medical experience was 3.5 years. Regarding knowledge on the topic, 57.9% considered that abdominal compartment syndrome begins with grade III intra-abdominal hypertension, 50% considered abdominal perfusion pressure to be the most reliable method for determining intra-abdominal hypertension, 89, 4% considered the intravesical measurement technique to be the most used, 71.1% considered oliguria to be the early sign of abdominal compartment syndrome. Intra-abdominal pressure was not measured in 81.6% of those interviewed, as there was no protocol defined by the service. Seventy-nine percent of respondents stated that they did not know the consensus definitions of the World Society of the Abdominal Compartment Syndrome (WSACS). Half of the doctors were able to correctly classify intra-abdominal hypertension and indicate the onset of abdominal compartment syndrome.
30043928	To evaluate the effectiveness of educational interventions via telephone on the duration and exclusivity of breastfeeding. Systematic review of the literature, including only Randomized Clinical Trials. The exposure factor was an educational intervention via telephone, and the outcomes were duration and exclusivity of breastfeeding. Literature in Portuguese, English and Spanish published between 2010 and 2016 were searched in Cochrane, Lilacs, Medline and Scopus. The articles were analyzed by summarizing the results. 241 articles were identified, of which 231 did not meet the inclusion criteria, so only 10 articles were reviewed. Four studies did not show efficacy related to breastfeeding. As common characteristics, these studies were carried out in short periods and in pairs. The others revealed effectiveness on the duration and/or exclusivity of breastfeeding. The latter were mostly long-term intervention studies carried out by lactation consultant nurses. Evidence shows that the telephone is a viable technology for promoting breastfeeding, providing health units and professionals with an alternative that can contribute to mother-baby care.
30043929	Describe the process of building an intervention in the form of a nursing care program for adolescents, aimed at preventing and controlling overweight/obesity at school. Methodological study, developed through Intervention Mapping, in Natal/RN, Brazil, between October 2015 and September 2016, with the participation of adolescents, public school teachers and Primary Care nurses. Data sources were focus groups, interviews and integrative review. The Collective Subject Discourse was used in the analysis. At the end of the six stages of Intervention Mapping, the “School Health Nursing Program” was constructed, which should be implemented in 10 months, with five weekly exercise classes and one weekly session of nursing interventions, detailed in the Program. The nursing intervention guided by Intervention Mapping allows actions based on theories, community participation, school/service links and continuity of care.
30043930	To describe and interpret the experience of breastfeeding among women who underwent mammoplasty surgery before motherhood. Descriptive study, with a qualitative approach, developed with women attended at a Human Milk Bank, between 2014 and 2015. Data analysis was based on the content analysis method and was based on the Interactive Breastfeeding Theory. 13 women participated. Four categories emerged: (In)Success in Exclusive Breastfeeding: influence of maternal and child biological conditions; Maternal feelings: perception about breastfeeding; Decision-making on whether to continue breastfeeding or use supplements; Role of health professionals in protecting, promoting and supporting breastfeeding: (Mis)Information about the implications of surgery. The unfavorable biological conditions of women who underwent mammoplasty generated unsuccessful experiences with exclusive breastfeeding and limited their decision-making, despite the desire to breastfeed.
30043931	The “Brave New World” envisioned a society dominated by scientific and technological progress that reached the point of subjugating and dehumanizing human beings. The future predicted in this work is not far from what we are experiencing today. Thus, considering that Nursing is affected and challenged in the midst of these technological transformations, this article aims to discuss the present and future of Nursing in a society undergoing constant technological transformation. In the midst of an entire technological apparatus, in which fundamental procedures begin to be carried out by machines, Nursing needs to begin to reflect on what would be its best stance or its differentiator in a world with a strong tendency towards technological dominance. The transformations of the future are still uncertain, but they will drastically alter the way individuals relate to themselves, each other and health services. However, even in the midst of uncertainties arising from present and future technological and scientific advances, the nature of Nursing, essentially based on human interactions, can guarantee a prominent place for this profession in society.
30043941	To analyze the association between the occurrence of itching and adherence to the prescribed diet, biochemical indicators of renal function and the quality of hemodialysis in chronic kidney disease patients. Cross-sectional study, carried out in a dialysis clinic in the Northeast of Brazil, with 200 patients undergoing hemodialysis, in the first half of 2015. Inferential statistics were used to analyze the data, using the Chi-Square and Fisher&#39;s Exact tests ; and Mann Whitney U test. Itching was present in 51% of the sample, statistically associated with phosphorus consumption (P=0.024) and elevated serum calcium (P=0.009). Itching in chronic kidney disease patients undergoing hemodialysis is influenced by non-adherence to the prescribed diet, in addition to increased biochemical indicators of renal function.
30043942	Describe epidemiological characteristics of perinatal deaths due to actions of the Public Health System. Descriptive study of temporal analysis, population composed of perinatal deaths of mothers living in Recife, 2010-2014. Used List of causes of preventable deaths to classify preventability and EpiInfo version 7 to analyze the variables. There were 1,756 perinatal deaths (1,019 fetal and 737 early neonatal), there was a reduction in early neonatal deaths (-15.8%) and an increase in fetal deaths (12.1%). The main causes were: fetus and newborn affected by maternal illness and asphyxia/hypoxia at birth. Most deaths were preventable, focusing on the group of adequate assistance provided to women during pregnancy. Gaps in the assistance provided to women during childbirth explain the percentage of asphyxia/hypoxia. Reducing preventable perinatal mortality is associated with expanding access and quality of care to ensure promotion, prevention, treatment, specific and timely care.
30043943	Identify theoretical references and instruments for evaluating critical thinking in order to support studies in nursing and education. Integrative review, searching for scientific articles in Portuguese, English and Spanish, in the LILACS, SCIELO, IBECS, MEDLINE/PubMed and SCOPUS databases, using the descriptors: “thought”, “teaching” and “nursing” or their respective terms in English. 3147 articles were found; 23 articles published between 2010 and 2015 were selected. 14 (60.2%) studies analyzed used Facione&#39;s framework to support the research. Eight (34.4%) studies were identified using different critical thinking assessment instruments, applied in nursing and education. Most of the studies analyzed used Facione&#39;s framework. Of the assessment instruments, the California Critical Thinking Skills Test (CCTST) and Watson - Glaser Critical Thinking Appraisal stood out; in relation to critical thinking skills, both focus the assessment on cognitive critical thinking skills.
30043944	Know the scientific production about nurses working in oncology as patient navigators, Nurse Navigators. Integrative review with searches in the LILACS, MEDLINE/PubMed, SCOPUS, SciELO, Web of Science and Science Direct databases, using the descriptors: patient; navigation; nurse; professional; cancer; oncology; navigator and navigators. 17 articles were identified. These were grouped according to thematic approach: Assistance Processes; Patients; and Health Professionals. It was evident that the scientific knowledge produced about Nurse Navigator is concentrated in the United States, Australia, Canada, Sweden and Denmark, countries where the first Patient Navigation Programs were implemented. There were no studies published in journals or local populations. The role of the Nurse navigator provides a difference in the quality of care services. Although international research addressing the topic is recent, it is clear that more studies are still needed on the role of this professional.
30043945	Verify the adequacy of the roles and functions performed by higher education professionals in the psychosocial care network services of a capital in the Brazilian Northeast. Analytical, cross-sectional study with a quantitative approach. The sample was made up of 65 professionals from seven services in the psychosocial care network in Natal, Rio Grande do Norte, Brazil. A questionnaire with closed and semi-open questions was used. Data were analyzed using SPSS version 20.0, applying the Chi-square and Fisher&#39;s exact tests. A significance level of 5% (p&lt;0.05) was adopted. inadequacy was detected regarding care for family groups (52.3%), specialized training in mental health (69.2%; p=0.02) and working conditions in services (87.7%). The roles and functions developed by professionals in the services researched were consistent with the proposal of these services, although they faced numerous difficulties.
30043946	To analyze the conceptions of nursing professionals working in Basic Health Units regarding the detection and prevention of abused elderly people. Descriptive, exploratory, qualitative study. Carried out in two UBS, Mossoró/RN, using a semi-structured interview script, from March to August 2013. Sample composed of four nurses and six nursing technicians. Content analysis was carried out. Four categories were identified: Strategies used to identify violence against the elderly; Types of violence against the elderly; Conduct used after finding a suspicion of violence; SUS and the problem of violence against the elderly. Many professionals recognize/distrust possible cases, however, they do not know how to proceed. The scale of the problem requires pragmatic interventions to be carried out in the clinical environment and in the social context. There is a need for ongoing education for professionals and greater communication between the bodies responsible for reporting and receiving complaints.
30043947	Analyze the structure and content of nurses&#39; social representations regarding domestic violence against women. Qualitative study carried out with 100 nurses between May/September 2014 in two hospitals in Rio Grande/RS. Data were collected through free recall and semi-structured interviews. They were treated by the Evoc software and contextual analysis, respectively. A negative representation is observed with nuclear elements alluding to forms of violence and its judgment, expressed in “physical aggression” and “disrespect”. On the periphery, “fear” reveals both the feelings of professionals and victims towards the aggressor, and “submission” is highlighted as a cause of violence. The possibility of a subgroup with differentiated representation is inferred, given the term “verbal aggression” in the contrast zone. The focus on physical injuries and blaming the victim can limit care actions, therefore it is essential to discuss this issue with health professionals.
30043948	Analyze the understanding of municipal health managers about public policies aimed at the elderly population and how they are implemented in the municipality. Qualitative study, developed with 14 municipal health managers. Data were collected through semi-structured interviews and analyzed according to the precepts of content analysis. The results highlight the lack of knowledge among municipal health managers regarding public care policies for the elderly. Also, the care provided to elderly people in the municipalities studied focuses on measures to control health problems. Municipalities do not have specific health care policies for the elderly population. Thus, these results can support reflections on care for the elderly in health services, its relationship with legislation and the applicability of public health policies.
30043949	Identify and compare the structure and content of representations of domestic violence against women among students in the initial and final years of an undergraduate Nursing course. Qualitative study, carried out between August/November 2014, in Rio Grande/RS, with 132 nursing students, 71 from the initial series and 61 from the final. Data were collected through evocations and interviews; for treatment, EVOC software and content analysis were used. Approval under Opinion 109/2014. In common in the central core are the terms violence, cowardice, disrespect and pain. The first group also evoked sadness and the second, physical violence. The representation has a negative connotation, with discreet differentiation. Students in the final grades are based on reified knowledge and have a structured representation, with concept, image and attitude. It is expected to help students act in the prevention, identification and intervention of victims of violence.
30043950	Build qualitative outcome indicators in Psychosocial Care related to autonomy from the perspective of users and family members. Evaluative case study, with a hermeneutic-dialectic theoretical framework in a Psychosocial Care Center in Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil. The first stage of data collection, February-July/2014, consisted of constructing indicators based on the analysis of qualitative data from two evaluative surveys in this same service. The second stage, August-September/2014, validated the indicators constructed through focus groups with nine users and nine family members. The participants pointed out three qualitative indicators related to their autonomy as a result of entering the service, namely, improvement in income self-management, better development of daily activities and greater negotiating power. The methodology used proved to be suitable for creating qualitative indicators from the perspective of users and family members, as well as showing that the service helps in the process of gaining autonomy.
30043951	To evaluate occupational stress among healthcare workers at a university hospital. Cross-sectional study with nursing and medical health workers at a university hospital in the South of Brazil. Data were collected between August 2011 and August 2012 using a characterization questionnaire and the Job Stress Scale. Descriptive and univariate analysis (Kruskal-Wallis) was performed. Participants presented high demand and high control at work and low social support, indicating active work. Nurses had less control over their work (p&lt;0.001) and doctors received greater social support (p=0.006). Reduced social support was related to greater exposure to stress among nursing assistants and technicians (p=0.012). Workers who perceived reduced social support had greater exposure to stress. It is necessary to implement stress prevention strategies among health workers, such as strengthening social support at work.
30043952	Develop a conceptual structure that explains how elderly people from different cultures experience aging, formulate concepts and attribute values ​​to the aging process. Qualitative research, carried out with 33 elderly people, in a triple border municipality. Data were collected between February and August 2011, using Symbolic Interactionism and Grounded Theory as a theoretical-methodological strategy. The central theme “Having to grow old: sociocultural practices directing aging in different ethnicities” was identified, consisting of subprocesses that characterize the structural concepts of the study: Old age conceived by multifactors (physical, biopsychic and sociocultural); Experiencing aging in the process of cultural adaptation; Experiencing aging as the continuity of life; Redefining social roles and; Culture influencing habits and customs in health care. The experience of aging proved to be a unique process for each individual and the values ​​attributed to it are influenced by culture.
30056460	This study aimed to verify the history of orthodontic treatment and its associated factors. This cross-sectional study was conducted in the city of Passo Fundo, Brazil, with a representative sample of adolescents regularly enrolled in high school, aged between 15 and 19 years, from 20 schools. A structured questionnaire was applied to access demographic, behavioral and health variables. Associations between orthodontic treatment history and independent variables were analyzed using the chi-square or Fisher&#39;s exact tests. Additionally, multivariate regression with robust variance was performed. 736 students were examined and interviewed. Orthodontic treatment was performed by 57.6% of adolescents, while 42.4% of participants did not mention it. In the multivariate analysis, the following variables were significantly associated with a history of orthodontic treatment: female (PR= 1.26; 95%CI: 1.11-1.43), white (PR= 1.32; 95%CI: 1.11-1.56), mothers with a high educational level (PR=1.49; 95%CI: 1.28-1.74), tooth loss (PR=1.21; 95%CI: 1.06 -1.39) and concern about oral health (PR=0.69; 95%CI: 0.61-0.78). Going to a private school was not significantly associated with a history of orthodontic treatment (p&gt;0.05). This study demonstrated that high levels of orthodontic treatment history are found in adolescents and this is associated with gender, ethnicity, high level of education of the adolescent&#39;s mother and tooth loss. Concern about oral health proved to be a protective factor for orthodontic treatment.
30056461	The objective of the present study was to evaluate the cytotoxic effects of 2.5% sodium hypochlorite (NaOCl), 17% ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) and 1% peracetic acid (PAA) on human fibroblasts. The FG11 and FG15 cell lines were colonized in 24-well cell plates to evaluate cell proliferation and in 96-well cell plates for the MTT assay; Dulbecco&#39;s modified Eagle&#39;s medium (DMEM) was used as a control. The experimental solutions were used at dilutions of 0.01%, 0.05%, and 0.1% and evaluated 1, 2, and 4 hours apart. The data were subjected to statistical analysis using two-way ANOVA, followed by the Bonferroni test with a significance level of p &lt;0. 05. The evaluation of cell proliferation in this study showed 2.5% NaOCL as cytotoxic in 3 dilutions and 3 time intervals, 17% EDTA in dilutions of 0.05% and 0.1% in intervals of 2 and 4 hours, and 1% PAA in all dilutions within 4 hours. The cell viability test (MTT) showed 2.5% NaOCl cytotoxic at 0.05% and 0.1% at all intervals, 17% EDTA cytotoxic at 0.1% dilutions at intervals of 2 and 4 hours and 1% cytotoxic PAA in a 0.1% dilution at intervals of 2 and 4 hours. In conclusion, 1% PAA proved to be less cytotoxic than 2.5% NaOCl and 17% EDTA.
30056462	The objective of this study was to identify the relationship between the instruments used to select and diagnose patients with temporomandibular disorder (TMD). A retrospective study was carried out using dental records of patients treated for pain and dysfunction in the temporomandibular joint, who had sought the institution for an initial evaluation between January and December 2015. Data from medical history and physical examination were collected, particularly those who focused on the diagnosis of TMD. The following instruments were used to assess the severity of TMD signs and symptoms: the Fonseca anamnestic index (FAI); The Helkimo index (HI); the American Orofacial Pain Association questionnaire (AAOPQ) and the Oral Habits and Symptoms Questionnaire (JSOHQ). Thirty-eight patient records were included, mostly women (84.6%) and mean age of 37.42 ± 14.32 years. Patients who were classified as having severe TMD by the FAI had a greater number of positive responses on the AAOPQ (6.25 ± 1.42; ANOVA F = 15.82), with a statistically significant difference compared to patients with mild TMD (3.0 ± 1.22; p &lt; 0.01). A positive correlation (r = 0.78; p &lt;0.01) was found between the number of positive responses on the AAOPQ and the sum of scores on the JSOHQ. Patients who were classified as having severe TMD in the FAI exhibited higher scores in the JSOHO (18.58 ± 4.96/ANOVA F = 14.43), with a statistically significant difference when compared to patients with average TMD (12.08 ± 5 .64; p &lt;0.01) and mild (7.46 ± 4.89; p &lt;0.01). In the studied sample, there was congruence between the instruments used to differentiate patients with severe and mild TMD. The selection of instruments must be rational in order to improve the quality of results.
30064145	To evaluate the relationship between the use of psychoactive substances during pregnancy and the occurrence of severe maternal morbidity (MMG), perinatal outcomes and repercussions on the neuropsychomotor development of exposed children. METHODS: Case-control study from a severe maternal morbidity cohort (COMMAG). Women with MMG were considered cases. Controls were women with low-risk pregnancies, admitted during the same period as the cases. Cohort data were collected retrospectively from childbirth hospital records and face-to-face interviews conducted with 638 women and their index pregnancy children, between 6 months and 5 years after birth. In the interview, substance use during pregnancy was assessed with a modified question introduced in the questionnaire for screening the use of alcohol, tobacco and other substances 2.0 (ASSIST) and the children&#39;s neuropsychomotor development was assessed using the screening test of the Denver II development. The prevalence of the use of legal or illegal drugs during pregnancy was around 17%. Of the users, 63.9% used alcohol, 58.3% used tobacco, 9.2% used cocaine/crack and 4.6% used marijuana. There was no association between drug use during pregnancy and MMG. However, tobacco use was associated with hemorrhage, the presence of clinical criteria for <i>near miss</i> and changes in child development. The use of alcohol was associated with neonatal asphyxia and the use of cocaine/crack with the occurrence of some clinical complication during pregnancy. CONCLUSION: Abuse of legal or illicit substances during pregnancy is frequent and associated with worse maternal, perinatal and child development outcomes.
30066724	Evaluate hearing thresholds at high frequencies, seeking to compare responses between ears, verify the correlation of audibility level with increasing age and analyze responses by frequency for normal-hearing adults. This study was prospective, quantitative and cross-sectional, with a convenience sample. The sample included 60 subjects, aged between 18 and 58 years, mean age of 25.8 years, with hearing thresholds within the normal range of 250 to 8000 Hz and normal results in acoustic immittance measurements. To research high frequencies, Interacoustics model AS10 HF equipment was used with KOSS R/80 type headphones and thresholds expressed in dBNPS. As for the audibility thresholds, there is an increase for the right ear, with statistical significance at 10, 11 and 14 kHz and a tendency towards significance at 13 kHz, as well as from the 14 kHz frequency there is a progressive increase directly proportional to the frequency bilaterally. and the older the individuals, the higher the thresholds for all frequencies. High frequency audibility thresholds become higher with a progressive increase proportional to the increase in frequency and age of normal-hearing individuals with higher values ​​for the right ear.
30066731	The ANDROMEDA-SHOCK study is an international, multicenter, randomized, controlled study comparing peripheral perfusion-guided resuscitation with lactate-guided resuscitation in patients with septic shock, with the purpose of testing the hypothesis that peripheral perfusion-guided resuscitation is associated lower morbidity and mortality. Report the statistical analysis plan for the ANDROMEDA-SHOCK study. We describe the study design, primary and secondary objectives, patients, randomization methods, interventions, outcomes and sample size. We describe our statistical analysis plans for the primary, secondary, and tertiary outcomes. We also describe subgroup and sensitivity analyses. Finally, we provide details for presenting the results, including table models to present baseline characteristics, the evolution of hemodynamic and perfusion variables, and the effects of treatments on outcomes. In accordance with research best practices, we report our statistical analysis plan and data management plan before closing the database and beginning data analysis. Our expectation is that this procedure will prevent the occurrence of biases in the analysis and increase the usefulness of the reported results.
30066736	create a multidisciplinary routine manual for tracheostomy procedures for adult and pediatric patients at the Amazonas State Oncology Control Center Foundation. the protocol was developed using the modified Delphi method, which consisted of applying two series of questionnaires to 20 professionals from the unit. thirteen professionals completed both stages. In the first stage, 53 of 92 questions presented reached consensus (57.6%). These sentences that reached consensus formed the text of the second stage, which was divided into eight chapters that were evaluated by marking the answers offered on a Linkert scale. All chapters presented in the second stage achieved consensus, meaning that the sum of the agree and strongly agree responses were all above 70%. Using the data obtained in the consensus, a tracheostomy management protocol and a care guidance manual for patients and their caregivers were created.
30066737	to study the efficacy and safety of using subconjunctival triamcinolone acetate alone or in combination with mitomycin C as a modulator of trabeculectomies healing in rabbits. Thirty male New Zealand albino rabbits underwent bilateral trabeculectomy. The animals were divided into four experimental groups with 15 eyes per group: control, mitomycin C, triamcinolone acetate and triamcinolone acetate + mitomycin C. Applanation tonometry and clinical analysis of the bleb using the Moorfields Grading System were obtained post-operatively. operative. To assess healing, quantitative analysis of the inflammatory infiltrate (polymorphonuclear) was carried out using Hematoxylin &amp; Eosin staining and vascular proliferation using immunohistochemistry. A significant decrease in postoperative intraocular pressure was observed in all groups compared to preoperative (p&lt;0.001). However, there was no difference between the groups (p=0.186). The triamcinolone acetate + mitomycin C group showed better rates of maximum bleb height and vascularization of the central area of ​​the bleb (p=0.001); Furthermore, there was less inflammatory response (p=0.001) and less vascular proliferation (p=0.001) in the intermediate phase of the study compared to monotherapies. the association of mitomycin C with triamcinolone acetate resulted in a synergistic action between these agents, with wider and more diffuse blisters and less inflammatory infiltrate and less vascular proliferation in the intermediate stage of monitoring in this animal model.
30066738	Inadequate postoperative pain therapy in laparoscopic cholecystectomy can lead to delayed mobilization, patient dissatisfaction, delayed hospital discharge and development of chronic pain. The objective was to identify the best therapeutic strategy available to anesthesiologists in the treatment of acute postoperative pain in patients undergoing elective laparoscopic cholecystectomy. This is a systematic review that included 36 complete articles indexed in the Medline, Scopus, Web of Science and LILACS databases, with a five-year time frame (2012 to 2016), resulting from controlled and randomized studies that were subjected to qualitative analysis. . In a multimodal analgesia proposal, it is important to consider contraindications, adverse effects, dose and ideal timing of interventions. Non-opioid drugs are used, such as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)/cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors, gabapentin/pregabalin, N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonists, among others . Opioids can be used in low doses associated or not with multimodal therapy and/or restricted to cases in which non-opioid multimodal analgesia is insufficient. It is concluded that there is no consensus on the best analgesic strategy to be implemented in acute postoperative pain after laparoscopic cholecystectomy, which requires its applicability on an individual basis, based on scientific evidence found in the literature. Contributions to teaching and professional practice are the theoretical enrichment of the analgesic medication options available for the treatment of postoperative pain in patients undergoing elective laparoscopic cholecystectomy, in addition to alerting the team to consider the adverse effects of the implemented interventions.
30066818	Describe a case of congenital syphilis with late diagnosis and identify the missed opportunities in the different phases/levels of health care, which delayed the diagnosis. Boy, 34 days old, referred from the Basic Health Unit to a tertiary hospital due to increased abdominal volume and progressive jaundice for 2 weeks, fecal hypocholia, hepatosplenomegaly, anemia, thrombocytopenia and elevated liver enzymes. On physical examination, he presented erythematous-scaly lesions on his hands and feet and macular rash in the inguinal region, presence of ascites, liver palpable 5 cm from the right costal margin and spleen palpable 3 cm from the left costal margin. Infant serology: CMIA (microparticle chemiluminescence) reagent, VDRL (Venereal Diseases Research Laboratory) 1:1024 and TPHA (Treponema pallidum Hemagglutination) reagent. Maternal serology: CMIA and TPHA reagents, VDRL 1:256. Radiograph of long bones showed symmetrical periostitis; periosteal lifting; and lucent metaphyseal bands on femurs, humeri, ulnas and tibias. After treatment with crystalline penicillin, he showed clinical and laboratory improvement and was discharged on the 18th day of hospitalization. This case shows that late diagnosis of congenital syphilis still occurs due to failures in prevention strategies for this disease, both in primary care and at secondary and tertiary levels. The application of interventions recommended by the Ministry of Health and the identification of situations in which failures occur in their implementation are important for the evaluation of routine care at all levels of care and in the various units responsible for the care of newborns and infants. young.
30066819	To verify the relationship between vitamin D receptor (RVD) gene polymorphisms and clinical signs and vitamin D (VD) levels in asthmatics. Cross-sectional study with 77 children aged 7 to 14 years from a specialized outpatient clinic, divided into 3 groups: asthmatics, using inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) for more than a year; asthmatics without the need for ICS; non-asthmatic and non-allergic (according to the International Study of Asthma and Allergies in Childhood - ISAAC. The following were evaluated: spirometry, allergy tests, presence of the CDX2 polymorphism of the RVD promoter by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and genotyping of polymorphisms of exons 2 and 3 by PCR-SSCA (single-strand conformational analysis), total immunoglobulin E (IgE) and specific IgE for mites and grasses in the three groups studied. Levels of 25-hydroxyvitamin D were measured in asthmatics. was 10.8±2.2 years, 57% male, 38 asthmatics with BSI, 22 without BSI and 17 non-asthmatics. Allergic rhinitis was present in 90% of asthmatics, CDX2 polymorphism in 23% of asthmatics and absent in controls (p). =0.03). Lower levels of forced expiratory volume in the first second (FEV1%) were observed in asthmatics homozygous for CDX2 (p=0.001). RV deficiency or insufficiency was diagnosed in 98% of asthmatics. There was no association between VD levels and genetic polymorphisms of exons 2 and 3. A positive association was observed between homozygous CDX2 polymorphism and asthma and lower FEV1% values. CDX2 can modify the cellular interaction of RVD with the vitamin, and may be associated with asthma and difficulty controlling the disease.
30066820	Verify the profile and suitability of the use of antibacterials in hospitalized children. Cross-sectional study. An analysis was carried out of all children who used antibacterials during hospitalization from January to December 2015, in a large private philanthropic hospital in southern Brazil. The information was obtained by reviewing medical records and included demographic (age, sex, race and body weight) and clinical data (reason for hospitalization, use of antibacterials and clinical outcome). Descriptive statistics were used. Of the 318 patients included, 61.3% were male. The age range ranged from 2 to 11 years (average: 5.8±2.9 years of age). The prevalence of antibacterial use was 24.4% considering the total of 1,346 children who were hospitalized. The length of stay had a median of four days. The main reason for hospitalization was clinical and the most prescribed antibacterial was cefazolin, with the predominant intravenous route. Regarding the use of antibacterials, 62.2% presented antibacterial prescriptions considered adequate. Underdosage and overdose had values ​​of 11.7 and 14.6% of included patients, respectively. Regarding administration intervals, 8% were characterized by long intervals and 3.5% by short intervals. Although the prevalence of the use of antibacterials in hospitalized children was not so high, a considerable part of the sample showed inadequacy regarding the use of this type of medication, considering the dose and interval of use. These data are a cause for concern regarding the development of bacterial resistance and the occurrence of adverse reactions.
30066821	To evaluate whether there was an association between the occurrence of fractures after physical trauma and the use of glucocorticoids in the 12 months preceding the trauma, in children and adolescents treated in an emergency. From April to October 2015, a case-control study was conducted in a pediatric emergency, involving patients aged 3 to 14 years old, victims of physical trauma, with and without fractures. The data analyzed were obtained by consulting the medical records, by physical examination of the patients and by interviewing those responsible, comparing the use of glucocorticoids in the last 12 months, demographic characteristics, body mass index, milk intake, trauma intensity, practice of physical exercise and passive smoking at home in both groups of patients. 104 patients with physical trauma were studied, 50 with fractures and 54 without fractures. The use of glucocorticoids occurred in 15.4% of the patients studied, with no statistically significant difference between the two groups. The age range of 10 to 14 years, severe trauma and physical exercise predominated among patients with fractures. This study showed no association between previous use of glucocorticoids and the occurrence of fractures in children and adolescents. The age range of 10 to 14 years, severe trauma and physical exercise were associated with a higher risk of fractures.
30066822	Analyze the clinical, laboratory and histopathological characteristics and the path to establishing the diagnosis and treatment of patients with adrenal carcinoma (CSR). Retrospective study with 13 patients treated at the pediatric oncology service of the Hospital das Clínicas of the Federal University of Minas Gerais (HC-UFMG) between 2004 and 2015. Age at diagnosis ranged from 1.0 to 14.8 years (median: 2. 0 years). Manifestations of hypercortisolism were identified in all cases, and virilization in all girls. All patients met the Weiss criteria for histopathological diagnosis of CSR. Immunohistochemistry was performed in 61.5% of cases. The majority of patients presented with stage I disease (76.9%). All underwent total tumor resection. Two patients (stages III and IV) received chemotherapy associated with mitotane. The only death observed was that of the patient with stage IV disease. The overall survival probability for the entire group at 5.0 years was 92.3±7.4%. The median time between the onset of symptoms and diagnosis was 9.5 months, and 6.0 months between the first consultation and the start of treatment. The low age at diagnosis, the predominance of cases with localized disease and complete tumor resection - with only one case of tumor capsule rupture - are possibly the explanation for the favorable evolution of the studied population. The long journey between the onset of symptoms and diagnosis suggests the importance of training pediatricians to recognize the signs and symptoms of CSR early.
30066823	Create waist circumference cutoff points according to pubertal stage to identify overweight in adolescents. This is a longitudinal study, approved by the Research Ethics Committee, with 557 adolescents, aged 10 to 15, selected from public schools. Measurements of waist, arm, neck and hip circumference, fat percentage, body mass, height and blood pressure were measured. To determine sexual maturation, the Tanner scale self-assessment was used. The ROC curve (Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve) was applied to determine: predictive power, sensitivity, specificity and waist circumference cutoff points for identifying overweight. A positive correlation was observed between waist circumference and body mass, body mass index (BMI), arm and hip circumference, waist/hip ratio and blood pressure in both sexes. The cut-off points for waist circumference according to pubertal staging to identify overweight that showed the highest performance on the ROC curve were: 71.65 cm for pre-pubertal girls, 67.90 cm for pubescent girls, 70.25 cm for post-pubescent girls and 66.45 cm for pubescent boys. Age group, body mass, height, BMI, fat percentage, arm and hip circumference were considered predictors of altered waist circumference. Waist circumference cutoff points according to pubertal staging demonstrated excellent performance for identifying overweight and can be considered reliable for the Brazilian adolescent population, since using only chronological age in adolescence may underestimate nutritional status.
34075261	Global digital connectivity offers new opportunities to multinational companies, but it also brings unique risks, an area not yet well examined in international business. This article presents an organizational information processing model, which elucidates what (types and sources of risk), how (risk assessment and management) and with whom (vulnerable companies) these risks relate, in a dialectical way that seeks to combine theoretical insights and managerial actions. We focus on three types of risks (digital interdependence, information security, and regulatory complexity) that MNEs uniquely face and explain within-country and cross-country risk factors. We document variances among MNEs in exposure to these risks, proposing that the intensity of information flow, geographic diversity, international strategy, and global platform participation have strong implications for the firm&#39;s exposure to risk and its response. Finally, this model offers essential actions for MNEs, individually and collectively, to manage digital risks, emphasizing processes of building and deploying digital intelligence in search of transnational resilience for international activities that increasingly become digitally connected.
34076063	Treated hypertensive patients evaluated only with casual blood pressure (BP) measurement may be subject to erroneous decisions. To evaluate the behavior of BP by casual and residential measurement (MRPA), the behavior of antihypertensive classes and the prevalence of white coat hypertension (HABNC) and uncontrolled masked hypertension (HMNC). Cross-sectional study that evaluated patients using the TeleMRPA platform between 2017 and 2019. Those without medication, taking 3 or more medications, and using spironolactone and alpha-2 agonists were excluded. The variables analyzed were: age, sex, body mass index (BMI), number of valid BP measurements, mean systolic BP (SBP) and diastolic BP (DBP) by casual measurement and HBPM, and classes of antihypertensive drugs. Paired and unpaired t tests and chi-square tests were used. A significance level of 5% was adopted. 22,446 patients were selected, of which 6,731 met the criteria, 61.3% being female, with an average age of 57.8 (±12.6) years and average BMI of 29.0 (±5.1) kg/m2 . The mean SBP and DBP values ​​were 6.6 mmHg (p&lt;0.001) and 4.4 mmHg (p&lt;0.001) higher in the casual measurement than in HBPM. BP control rates were 57.0% by casual measurement and 61.3% by HBPM (p&lt;0.001), with a prevalence of HABNC and HMNC of 15.4% and 11.1%, respectively. Blockade of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system occurred 74.6% of the time and 54.8% were on monotherapy. The use of HBPM should be considered in the monitoring of treated hypertensive patients due to the high prevalence of HABNC and HMNC. Antihypertensive drugs had different behaviors in home measurements. (Arq Bras Cardiol. 2021; [online].ahead print, PP.0-0).
34076064	The beneficial effects of elabela on the cardiovascular system have been demonstrated in studies. To compare serum elabela levels in patients with chronic total occlusion (CTO) with control patients with normal coronary arteries and investigate whether there is a correlation with collateral development. Cross-sectional and prospective study. The study included fifty patients (28.0% women, mean age 61.6±7.3 years) with CTO in at least one coronary vessel and 50 patients (38% women, mean age 60.7±6.38 years) with normal coronary arteries. Patients in the OTC group were divided into two groups: Rentrop 0–1, composed of patients with poor collateral development, and Rentrop 2–3, comprised of patients with good collateral development. In addition to the patients&#39; age, sex, demographic characteristics and routine laboratory tests, elabella levels were measured. Demographic characteristics and laboratory values ​​were similar in both groups. While the mean level of NT-proBNP and troponin was higher in the OTC group, the mean level of elabella was lower (p&lt;0.05 for all). In multivariate regression analysis, NT-proBNP and elabela levels were found to be independent predictors for OTC. Furthermore, the elabella level was statistically higher in patients in the Rentrop 2–3 group compared to patients in the Rentrop 0–1 group (p&lt;0.05). In our study, we showed that the mean elabella level was low in CTO patients compared with normal patients. Furthermore, we found that the elabella level is lower in patients with poor collateral development compared to patients with good collateral development. (Arq Bras Cardiol. 2021; [online].ahead print, PP.0-0).
34076089	Identify factors associated with a greater probability of survival for men aged 60 or over in almost 15 years. It is a prospective cohort study, in which time zero is the year 2000 and whose deaths (final event) were measured until November 2014. The independent variables were obtained through personal characteristics, childhood life, educational status , lifestyle, social support, work history, socioeconomic situation and health condition. At the end of the period, 25.8% of elderly men remained alive, and the factors that stood out for a greater probability of survival were: performing 50% or more of basic and/or instrumental activities of daily living (confidence interval [CI] of 95% 0.41 - 0.64), being head of the family (95%CI 0.42 - 0.82), having community participation (95%CI 0.52 - 0.88), self-employed or as an owner (IC95% 0.54 - 0.88) and owning a home and movable assets (IC95% 0.56 - 0.92). Characteristics related to the autonomy of elderly men, even after almost 15 years, contributed to increasing the probability of survival.
34076090	To analyze the different profiles of use of dental services by Brazilian elderly people and their possible association with sociodemographic factors, comorbidities, functionality and self-perception of oral health. Population-based cross-sectional study, using secondary data from the 2013 National Health Survey. The sample consisted of 2,969 elderly people. Latent Class Analysis was used to construct the dependent variable “profile of use of dental services”. The independent variables formed three blocks: sociodemographic; comorbidities; and functionalities and self-perception in oral health. The Rao-Scott Test and Standardized Residual Analysis tested the association. To measure the effect of covariates, odds ratios were estimated using a hierarchical multiple multinomial logistic regression model. The significance level was 5%. Three latent classes were identified: direct disbursement profile, health plan profile and Unified Health System (SUS) profile. White elderly people were associated with the direct disbursement and health plan profiles. The health plan profile was more associated with married status or living with a spouse. In the multiple model, low education was associated with the profile of SUS users, and elderly people diagnosed with cancer with the health plan profile. Self-perceiving oral health as bad or very bad increased the chance of belonging to the SUS profile. Latent Class Analysis proved to be a powerful strategy for a subtle and detailed understanding of the profile of the use of dental services and its relationship with associated factors.
34076095	Diabetes mellitus is one of the most prevalent diseases in adults worldwide and is among the main causes of loss of years of healthy life, which is worsened by the accelerated aging of the population in Brazil. This study aims to assess the problem of diabetes mellitus and its complications and characterize healthcare for diabetics in Brazil, according to regions. Prevalences were estimated using a multinomial regression model, and the characterization of health care was based on triangulation between the National Health Survey (PNS), the National Program for Improving Access and Quality of Primary Care (PMAQ-AB ) and data from Farmácia Popular. The prevalence of diabetes mellitus in Brazil was 9.2%, according to the multinomial model, and the prevalence of corrected PNS (self-reported + altered glycosylated hemoglobin - HbA1c ≥ 6.5) was 9.4%. The proportion of underreporting of diabetes mellitus in the country was 42.5%, reaching 72.8% in the North Region. Among those diagnosed, more than half had HbA1c ≥ 6.5. The insufficient performance of fundus examinations (40%), with wide regional variation (North 25% - Southeast 52%), is reflected in the high prevalence of retinopathy. Foot examinations were poorly performed (30%), which could lead to more amputations. Around 80% of diabetics used medication, which indicates a high proportion still without treatment. Deficiencies in healthcare for diabetics lead to greater morbidity, hospitalizations (15%) and visits to emergencies (27% - PMAQ). The scenario presented in 2012, despite not being ideal, took place in a context of strengthening the Unified Health System (SUS). With the growing prevalence of diabetes mellitus and cuts in investment in public health, it is important to reflect on controlling the disease in the coming years.
34076098	Colon and rectal cancer has a high incidence worldwide, but the lethality of the disease is higher in developing countries. The objective of this study is to analyze sociodemographic and clinical factors associated with the delay in starting treatment for colon and rectal cancer in hospitals in Brazil. This is a retrospective study with data from hospital cancer records in Brazil from 2006 to 2015. The outcome analyzed is the time to start treatment for colon and rectal cancer and possible associations between sociodemographic variables and clinical factors. Disparities were observed in the time to start treatment according to sociodemographic strata and geographic regions. There is a greater chance of delay in starting colon cancer treatment in patients over 50 years of age, of black race/skin color (OR = 1.50; 95% CI: 1.21-1.84) and mixed race (OR = 1.28; 95% CI: 1.17-1.42), illiterate (OR = 1.50; 95% CI: 1.19-1.90) or with low education and whose treatment took place in a municipality different from their residence (OR = 1.25; 95% CI: 1.14-1.38). In patients with rectal cancer, there is a greater chance of delay in starting treatment among cases over 50 years of age, of black race/skin color (OR = 1.44; 95% CI: 1.20-1, 72) and mixed race (OR = 1.29; 95% CI: 1.19-1.39), illiterate (OR = 1.71; 95% CI: 1.40-2.09) or with low education and whose treatment occurred in a municipality other than their residence (OR = 1.35; 95% CI: 1.25-1.47). In conclusion, greater attention should be devoted to reducing the time to start treatment in disadvantaged regions and in strata identified with barriers to accessing treatment in a timely manner.
34076099	In recent decades, we have witnessed important transformations in public services that imply changes in the role of the State as a central agent in the process of regulating public-private relations and in defining levels of public financing. Proposals to reform health systems are part of the process of social transformations that have affected different countries. However, changes in the articulation of different dimensions are the result of both broad processes of social transformation and specific experiences and temporalities, fundamental to understanding the results of this process. The British National Health System (NHS) has undergone the most important reform process in recent decades since its creation in 1948. This process began with a set of measures implemented by the Conservative government in 1991, but which were continued by changes made in 1997. and in 2002. When analyzing the reform carried out in the NHS, in addition to providing elements that allow us to understand the current debate provided by the initiatives led by Boris Johnson that aim to undertake new reform in the NHS, from 2021 onwards, it is possible to find convergences with other proposals for reforming public health systems, which were inspired by their conformation to the British model, as for example in the case of Brazil. The objective of this text is to discuss and analyze a case of reform in the healthcare system that can be considered paradigmatic in the development of major trends in the area. The article seeks to specifically analyze the process of reforms carried out in the NHS from the 1990s onwards, and their consequences from the point of view of restructuring the healthcare system.
34076100	The experiences of homeless pregnant women place tensions between individual guarantees and limits on State actions in the arena of public debate. This article analyzes the scientific production on the topic, in order to recognize the biomedical, legal and social arguments that support the positions in this debate. From an integrative review, on a national and international basis, 21 studies were analyzed and four statements were identified: Risks to the health of women and the fetus/child; Speeches about prenatal care; Rights of women and fetuses/children; and The senses about motherhood. It is concluded that these women&#39;s experience of motherhood is extremely complex, not only because of their homelessness, but because of the entire context, marked by unequal class, race and gender relations. In the national and international scenarios, the discourse of protection and care for the baby/fetus stands out, to the detriment of pregnant women. The criminalization of these maternity wards has been a global trend in which the expansion of “fetal/infant” rights means the retraction of women’s rights. This way of operating does not produce or encourage women to seek social and health services, but the opposite. It becomes an ethical and humanitarian imperative to think about other ways of caring, anchored in the perspective of human rights, so that care for the fetus/child does not translate into violence against women.
34076101	Present a proposal for speech therapy rehabilitation called Chronic Cough Management Therapy Program (TMTC) for the treatment of refractory chronic cough. The TMTC was developed based on two stages: literature analysis and clinical analysis. The literature analysis stage was carried out using the following procedures: electronic and manual search for articles and books published until June 2019 that included adult participants with chronic cough, and intervention with speech therapy; source selection; analysis of included articles and books; and, preparation of the initial version of the therapy program. The initial version of the therapy program resulting from the literature analysis stage was submitted to the clinical analysis stage using the following procedures: analysis by three judges; review of the proposal by the authors; reanalysis of judges; preparation of the final version called Therapy Program for Chronic Cough Management (TMTC). The TMTC synthesizes current scientific knowledge and clinical experience on the behavioral management of refractory chronic cough into a program with three main components, each with specific objectives and strategies. The TMTC consists of four sessions, held weekly, lasting between 30 and 45 minutes per session, carried out in hierarchical phases, with specific objectives and strategies per session. TMTC is a structured program to offer comprehensive cough rehabilitation. It is necessary to obtain scientific evidence about its effectiveness so that it can be used in clinical practice.
34076103	The peoples of the sea are culturally differentiated by their way of life intertwined with sea fishing and all their social and symbolic production. In the Brazilian northeast, these populations have been undergoing changes in their living conditions. The Family Health Strategy (ESF) needs to strengthen links with different cultures to meet its basic principles. We aim to reflect on the challenges of the ESF in the context of sea peoples. We carried out ethnographic research in the community of Redonda, Icapuí, Ceará, using dense descriptions constructed through the narratives of artisanal fishermen and their families. We analyze from the theoretical approach of studies in traditional communities. The results are presented in five themes: 1) in communities made up of relatives, the family has an extended dimension; 2) the temporalities of fishing life govern the common acts of the land-sea dyad; 3) the shifts between being “native” and being “from outside” create border zones that dialogue with the rituals of belonging; 4) the territorialization of the sea and knowledge from experience; 5) The ESF in the arenas of struggles for environmental justice. Here, the production of health is reaffirmed as the production of life for the peoples of the sea.
34076104	This research seeks to analyze residents&#39; knowledge about the territory, Pecém Industrial and Port Complex (CIPP), quality of life of communities living around the projects, in addition to the prevalence of hypertension and excess weight. This is a household-based epidemiological survey, involving four areas of the Family Health Strategy (ESF) in the Municipality of São Gonçalo do Amarante and one in Caucaia, Ceará, Brazil. The study was carried out between 10/2017 and 03/2018, in which anthropometric and blood pressure measurements were taken and sociodemographic data and knowledge about the community, CIPP and quality of life were collected. Of the 503 adults interviewed, 69.8% were female and the average age was 44 years old. Stopping was the area that reported the highest percentage of problems related to airborne particles (51.1%), worst concept in relation to CIPP (40.1% bad), highest percentage of worsening quality of life (29.1%) and greater desire to change (31.5%). Pecém had a higher percentage of problems in the community related to violence, illicit drug use and prostitution. It is concluded that there is evidence of an impact on the health and quality of life of local populations without greater direct benefits in terms of work/income.
34076105	This study evaluated accessibility to care in the Family Health Strategy (ESF) in a municipal system, home to a health macro-region in the state of Bahia. This was an evaluative study at two levels of analysis: municipal management and the local organization of ESF teams. Data production combined documentary analysis, non-participant observation and interviews with managers, professionals and users. An objective image was used with criteria and dimensions to evaluate accessibility in Primary Care. Family Health Teams (EqSF) still do not fully fulfill the role of preferred contact in municipal health systems and accessibility to care reflects the interdependence of municipal and local factors. Rural and peripheral teams performed better in organizational accessibility and central urban teams performed better in geographic accessibility. The evaluation centered on geographic and organizational criteria, in the combination of different sources of evidence and actors in the health system, in addition to the use of levels of analysis considering municipal and local management of PHC, are relevant contributions of this study, which can be expanded to other municipal systems with similar characteristics.
34076106	The work of Community Health Agents (CHA) was analyzed in light of the theory of Communities of Practice (CdP). Cross-sectional qualitative study, carried out in four municipalities in Ceará. Six focus groups and six interviews were held with 45 CHAs, respecting ethical aspects. The data corpus was analyzed using the content analysis technique. The results showed that the participation of CHAs in the ESF is marked by their experience in the community, with the main focus being monitoring priority groups. The practices confront them with various social and family complexities, generating reflections and constructions of new meanings for themselves and the work process. The ACS CdP engage and share unique challenges and learning from their work, characterized by contact and intimate relationships with families in the territory, which reveal needs that are little noticed by other ESF professionals. As for the reification processes, the meaning of being a CHW as someone who listens and welcomes, in addition to understanding the needs of families invisible to the services, became evident. The CHAs perform the role of articulating the ESF in the territories better, the greater the spaces for dialogue between them, other team members and management.
34076107	Community and workplace violence against healthcare professionals has caused feelings of vulnerability, emotional exhaustion and psychological changes, resulting in disturbances in sleep quality. Thus, we sought to analyze the association between community and workplace violence and the quality of sleep of health professionals who work in primary health care. The study was carried out with 286 health professionals who worked in primary health care, in one of the largest cities in Brazil. The primary outcome was sleep quality, assessed by the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index. The majority of participants (69.2%/p=0.074) were classified as “poor sleepers”, with nurses (73.3%/p=0.049) having the worst sleep quality. Furthermore, most professionals suffered some type of violence during work (p&lt;0.001), which harmed their professional activities (p=0.010), forcing them to change their behavior (p&lt;0.001), and to consider changing the location work (p=0.051). The results showed that professionals have experienced episodes of fear, anxiety and stress related to violence in the workplace. This highlights the need for public policies aimed at occupational health.
34076108	The study aims to investigate doctors&#39; perception of the different forms of contracting and their influence on the performance of essential attributes of PHC, in order to analyze the forms of connection that best contribute to its implementation and strengthening. Quantitative and cross-sectional research, using a semi-structured form with 268 doctors from the ESF in Fortaleza, Ceará. A unique sociodemographic profile was verified for each group evaluated, which can influence the work process and opinions about hiring methods. The development of essential attributes of PHC was positively evaluated, but there was a difference in this perception according to the bond evaluated. The work carried out by doctors in the ESF is influenced by the way they are hired (p&lt;0.001). There was a better performance of statutory employees (4.4), followed by scholarship holders from the Mais Médicos Program/Primary Care Valorization Program (3.7), Consolidation of Labor Laws (3.5) and, finally, those working by Autonomous Payment Receipt-RPA (2.4). It was analyzed that contracting via the Statutory Regime and RPA are, respectively, the best (85%) and worst (96.6%) form of contracting.
34076109	Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transvestite and transsexual (LGBTT) populations have not had a place in the &#39;official history&#39; of humanity, except as secondary actors that divert, distort or even tarnish the memory of peoples, guided by cis- heteronormativity. It is these same individuals who often experience obstacles in the assistance offered by the Family Health Strategy (ESF), within a system that is universal, comprehensive and equitable. In this article, we seek to analyze experiences narrated by primary care professionals in health care for LGBTT populations in Teresina, Piauí, Brazil. This is a qualitative research carried out with 32 professionals who worked in a basic health unit. The analysis was based on three dimensions - relational, organizational and contextual - inspired by the theoretical discussion of Giovanella and Fleury. Primary care, which should be one of those responsible for community health actions, which prioritizes health promotion and prevention, is the same one that has offered denial, violence, and neglect in the care of LGBTT people. Therefore, listening is one of the keys to respecting sexual and gender diversity, so that these people are recognized as users of the ESF.
34076110	The study aimed to develop a prototype of the GISSA ChatBot Mamãe-Baby Application (GCBMB), a conversational agent aimed at promoting child health, as well as evaluating the user experience and satisfaction with the aforementioned technological solution. This is a cross-sectional research, with mixed methodology, in two stages: the 1st, developing the dialogue scenarios and the GCBMB prototype, and, the 2nd, evaluating the experience of using the ChatBot through a structured questionnaire, and analysis of the Application&#39;s usage path through its database. The sample consisted of 142 postpartum women, with an average age of 25.4 years, of which 38.1% were primiparous. The women&#39;s level of agreement with simplicity, good quality of information, clarity of content, usefulness and satisfaction with the application were above 90%. Women between 26 and 30 years old had higher averages for number of accesses (5.21), number of scenarios accessed (9.26) and time of use (272 seconds) when comparing younger and older women. The use of ChatBots on smartphones is encouraging for promoting children&#39;s health, but more investment is needed to improve technological solutions and research with robust methodologies to evaluate their effectiveness.
34076111	In the scenario of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus (DM1), an encouraged practice is self-care. Therefore, the objective was to develop and validate a mobile application (APP) to promote self-care in adolescents with DM1. The method was divided into two stages: elaboration and validation, ranging from literature review, benchmarking, prototype construction and validation by experts. The construction of the APP was supported by the seven steps proposed by the American Association of Diabetes Educators. The screens were designed and possible functions were selected; After the design, the APP prototype was developed and named “DM Agendinha”. The content validation process was mediated by the Suitability Assessment of Materials instrument, through which the percentage obtained was 85.3%, characterizing the APP as “Superior Material”. For technical validation, the Smartphone Usability questionnaire was used, which obtained an overall Content Validity Index of 0.96. It is concluded, therefore, that the use of this material by adolescents will favor the acquisition of new knowledge and adherence to healthy practices, considering that it is an electronic technology that is easy to understand.
34076112	The group of LARIISA collaborators has been carrying out research and development of technological solutions to support decision-making in healthcare systems since 2009. Among the solutions produced is GISSA®, a cloud system resulting from the scientific and technological evolution of the LARIISA project. The objective of this article is to describe the evolution trajectory of GISSA®, a technological tool that supports the Family Health Strategy in northeastern Brazil, pointing out challenges, paths and potential. This is a descriptive and exploratory study, based on secondary sources from IBGE, INMET, SINAN, SIM and SINASC, with quantitative analysis based on machine learning models applied in the creation of microservices in digital health. Operating in the northeast and southeast regions, GISSA® provides information that qualifies the decision-making process of health managers and, consequently, contributes to improving the management of the municipal health system.
34076113	Postgraduate studies in Brazil have grown in recent years, however there is a knowledge gap in knowing whether the planned training objective of the course is being achieved. With this, the objective was to evaluate the contribution of the Postgraduate Program in Family Health, in the professional practice of its graduates. This is a cross-sectional study, carried out from October 2019 to July 2020, with 225 graduates. Data collection took place through an online questionnaire containing different sociodemographic and training variables, in addition to competencies developed in the master&#39;s degree and identification of the domains of Health Promotion Competencies. The majority of participants were female (78.2 %), nurses (58.2), public servants (64%) and SUS workers (93.3). It was noted that 222 (98.7%) graduates had the theme of their final work arising from a question related to practice. A high average score was observed for all competencies assessed. The average scores in the Health Promotion Skills domains were raised. It is concluded that the postgraduate program has contributed satisfactorily to the training of critical, active masters, with skills developed and being carried out in professional practice.
34076114	The objective is to discuss equity and access in mental health through the analysis of the distribution of primary care teams (Community Health Agents; Family Health Teams; Expanded Family Health Center) and the coverage of the Psychosocial Care Network (RAPS ) in three northeastern states (Ceará, Piauí and Rio Grande do Norte) in their respective health regions. This is a descriptive study, supported by exploratory quantitative analysis. To this end, we used the Department of Primary Care/DATASUS database to collect secondary data in relation to the historical series of qualifications of Primary Care teams. Regarding RAPS points of care, we used the database made available by the National Coordination of Mental Health of the Ministry of Health. The investigation concluded that until 2018, an important movement towards internalization and expansion of coverage in relation to primary care was observed in the country and psychosocial, impacting the expansion of equity in territories with less economic and social development. However, it was found that PHC services are more internalized, while other RAPS devices are more developed in capitals and large municipalities.
34076115	The Unified Health System (SUS) has the Family Health Strategy (ESF) as a model that reorients care and the work process. The article analyzes conceptions of ESF professionals regarding mental health and the production of care in a Basic Health Unit, in the Brazilian Northeast. This is qualitative research, aligned with the critical interpretative aspect, using interviews, free observation and documentary analysis, generating a network of meanings organized into two axes: a) “Mental Health” from the perspective of Family Health Strategy professionals and b) The care in “Mental Health”: praxis in the context of primary care. Despite the potential of the devices, the results of the study highlight conceptions about mental health limited to a vision congruent with a project of institutionalization and medicalization. Regarding the dimension of care, gaps are revealed regarding shared mental health experiences, through an incipient partnership between ESF and NASF professionals. The challenge of reconstructing a vision aligned with the precepts of Brazilian psychiatric reform and, in the materiality of teamwork, creating spaces that enable discussions, planning and agreements in the daily life of the ESF remains.
34076116	The objective of this article is to describe the indicators relating to planning and support in the work process reported by Family Health Teams, from the 3rd cycle of the National Program for Improving Access and Quality of Primary Care (PMAQ-AB) in the region Northeast of Brazil. Cross-sectional study, using secondary data from the external evaluation of the 3rd cycle of the PMAQ-AB. Sixteen indicators were used to investigate the actions of the teams&#39; work process. 14,489 family health teams that joined the program were evaluated. Among the indicators evaluated, it was found that the teams carried out meetings and action planning, self-assessment, monitoring and analysis of health indicators to reorganize the work process, highlighting the determining and conditioning factors. In terms of institutional support and matrix support for resolving complex cases, health surveillance and the Expanded Family Health Center (NASF) stand out. It was identified that there were improvements in the work process of teams in the Northeast region, however, the fragmented and verticalized work reality still needs to change, favoring a panorama of teamwork and shared, directly influencing the work process.
34076117	The objective of this article is to compare the assessment of users who participated in the PMAQ-AB regarding child health between the states of the Northeast macro-region of Brazil. Cross-sectional study, carried out with secondary data, based on interviews with 5,116 users of 4,190 Family Health Teams that operate in the nine states of the northeast macro-region. Fourteen questions about monitoring children from 0 to 2 years of age were evaluated. Proportions and 95% confidence intervals were calculated according to the Federation Unit of the Northeast region of Brazil. The indicators with the highest proportions were heel prick tests carried out within seven days of life (84.4%), children always consulted by the same professionals (79.1%), monitoring of growth and development expected for their age (84.9% ), dietary guidance (86.3%), vaccinations up to date (95.3%). The indicators with the lowest proportions were guidance on the best position for the child to sleep (45.7%) and whether they received the child&#39;s health booklet (46.9%). In all indicators, there were significant differences between the states analyzed. There are divergences in the quality of care offered to children&#39;s health according to the evaluation of users participating in the PMAQ-AB between states in the Northeast.
34076118	The objective of this article is to evaluate the structure and work process of health teams from the Family Health Strategy related to children&#39;s nutritional care. Evaluative research of 136 health teams in 45 municipalities in Paraíba. Structure data (availability of anthropometric equipment, supplements and technical documents) and process (management, intersectorality and activities of the Breastfeeding and Feeding Brazil Strategy) were synthesized into scores and classified as incipient, intermediate or advanced. Analyzes were carried out according to the contextual characteristics of the municipality (population size and human development) and the health team (whether from the Mais Médicos Program or conventional and whether expanded or not with a nutritionist). Nutritional care was classified at the intermediate level, with the availability of technical documents, the use of SISVAN or e-SUS and the implementation of the Breastfeeding and Feeding Brazil Strategy being the most deficient items. Large municipalities and expanded health teams with nutritionists presented better structure and process conditions, respectively. The fragmented implementation of nutritional care demands improvements in structure and process for its qualification.
34076119	Elderly people are vulnerable to the risks of using medications, especially those considered potentially inappropriate (PIM) in which the risks outweigh the benefits. The study sought to evaluate the PIM prescribed in Primary Health Care (PHC) and their associated factors. A cross-sectional, analytical study was carried out from March to December 2019, at PHC in Campina Grande, Paraíba, through interviews with 458 elderly people. The independent variables covered socioeconomic characteristics, health condition and use of medications and the outcome was medication classified as MPI by the Brazilian Consensus on Potentially Inappropriate Medicines. It was found that at least one PIM was prescribed for 44.8% of the elderly and the majority involved the Central Nervous System (54.4%). In the adjusted model, depression (RP=2.01; 95%CI 1.59-2.55), using medications other than those prescribed (RP=1.36; 95%CI 1.08-1.72) and polypharmacy (RP =1.80; 95%CI 1.40-2.33) remained an associated factor and self-reporting having systemic arterial hypertension became a protective factor (PR=0.65; 95%CI 0.49-0.87) . There is a clear need for actions that qualify the use of medicines by the elderly, in order to guarantee access and safety.
34076120	The research aims to identify the structuring elements that guide the formation of social representations of the diabetic foot among people with diabetes mellitus. Qualitative study, based on the Theory of Social Representations, following the complementary structural aspect, carried out in a capital in the Brazilian Northeast, from February to May 2019, with the participation of 100 people with diabetic foot. To collect data, the free word association test and the script to characterize the sociodemographic and clinical profile were used. The analysis was carried out using the openEVOC software. The constituent elements of the social representation of diabetic foot refer to the evocations of “cure” and “very bad”, and reveal that living with diabetic foot is challenging, but that there is hope for a cure that constitutes a driving force in the daily search of care. The prevention element appeared in the representational field, which denotes a more critical vision, which can transform the identified core elements. It appears that the representational structure is anchored in subjective, evaluative and attitudinal contents. It is concluded that this knowledge can contribute to the design of interventions that assist in the care practices and tracking of diabetic foot in services offered in Primary Health Care.
34076121	This study aimed to describe the prevalence of leprosy and verify the factors associated with multibacillary clinical forms in the Family Health Strategy scenario, a priority for the control and surveillance of the disease in northeastern Brazil. This is a cross-sectional study, which used data from the Notifiable Diseases Information System relating to leprosy cases reported in Imperatriz, Maranhão, between 2008 and 2017. Prevalences were determined for each year and for the period. To associate the variables and the multibacillary clinical forms, Poisson regression models were used, with a significance level of 5%. Of the 2,476 cases of leprosy analyzed, the majority referred to multibacillary clinical forms. The prevalence varied between 15.6 and 7.8/10 thousand inhabitants, with high and very high levels of endemicity. The variables male gender, age ranges between 30 and 59 years and ≥60 years, schooling &lt;8 years, degree 2 of physical disability, reactional episode types 1 and 2 and urban residence area showed significant associations (p≤0.05) with multibacillary clinical forms. Such findings can serve as a basis for developing and implementing leprosy control and surveillance measures, directing actions towards the most vulnerable groups and becoming more effective.
34076122	In this interview, Antônio Carlile Holanda Lavor, a public health doctor, with a 57-year career, long and extensive experience in managing the Unified Health System (SUS), especially in primary health care, talks about his management at the head of the Foundation&#39;s unit Oswaldo Cruz in Ceará (Fiocruz-CE), from 2008 to the present. Known internationally for having institutionalized the Health Agents Program in Ceará in 1987, he discusses the Fiocruz-CE implementation process and the role of research in guiding the work of the Family Health Strategy during the Covid-19 pandemic.
34076123	The objective is to verify the association between sexual maturation and physical activity in adolescence. This is a systematic review study based on articles published between 2008 and 2018 in the Medline-PubMed, SciELO, Web of Science, Scopus, Lilacs and Adolec VHL databases. The descriptors and keywords adolescent, sexual maturation, survey, questionnaire and physical activity were used, in Portuguese and their equivalent in English, and 806 articles were identified. After applying the selection criteria, 12 articles were included. A higher level of physical activity was observed in adolescents in the initial sexual maturation phase. The evolution of sexual maturational development appears to be correlated with reduced levels of physical activity. The findings do not demonstrate a consensus on the association between sexual maturation and level of physical activity regarding the direct or inverse predisposition of sexual maturation in relation to the level of physical activity among adolescents. More research is needed to understand this relationship and enable professionals involved in adolescent health to act effectively to combat physical inactivity.
34076125	The text presents and discusses the main aspects related to the current dynamics of the vaccine industry in the world and in Brazil, focusing on the demand created by the COVID-19 pandemic. On a global level, it briefly explains the place currently occupied by Brazil within the BRICS and exposes and analyzes the options - identities and differences - of the industrial policy of Brazil, China and India in the field of vaccines. Next, it analyzes the shift of the vaccine industry from a situation of exclusive production of immunizers to majority control by the large pharmaceutical industry. Further on, it recovers recent fundamental aspects of the vaccine industry in Brazil, with an emphasis on Biomanguinhos/Fiocruz and the Butantan Institute. Finally, it discusses the successes and limitations of the technology transfer mechanism used by the two institutions, as well as the relevance of the commitment historically assumed by them with public health policies.
34076126	This essay reflects on sexual practices and prevention in the contexts of the AIDS and COVID-19 pandemics. It analyzes data collected between July and October 2020, through participant observation, as part of an ethnographic research on vulnerability and prevention to HIV among men who have sex with men in the Metropolitan Region of Recife. The results point to the relevance of body appearance and the emotional bond between partners in engendering emotions that mediate dealing with the risk of infection in both pandemics. It highlights the need to incorporate these communication dimensions into informative materials, in order to make them more effective.
34076127	The objective was to verify adherence to prevention measures in elderly people with a greater predisposition to severe forms of COVID-19 and its association and interaction with social support. This is a cross-sectional study carried out on a sample of 3,477 participants in the telephone survey of the Brazilian Longitudinal Study of the Health of Elderly People (ELSI-COVID-19 initiative), who reported having left home in the week before the survey. Adherence was measured by the frequency with which people left the house, the need to leave the house, wearing a mask and washing their hands. The analyzes were based on the Poisson model with robust variance. Age ≥ 65 years, hypertension, diabetes and obesity were considered predisposing factors for severe forms of COVID-19. Social support included living arrangement and social connection during the pandemic. Approximately 46% showed better adherence, which was positively associated with the number of predisposing factors for severe forms. Social support was not associated with adherence and did not modify this association, after adjustments. It is concluded that adherence to prevention measures, which should be extended to everyone, is concentrated in the elderly with a greater predisposition to severe forms of COVID-19, regardless of social support.
34076129	The objective of this article is to analyze the use of spatial artificial intelligence in the context of immunization against COVID-19 for the appropriate selection of necessary resources. This is a cross-sectional ecological study based on a spatio-temporal approach using secondary data in Basic Health Units in Brazil. Four analytical steps were adopted to assign a population volume per basic unit, applying artificial intelligence algorithms to satellite images. In parallel, the conditions of access to mobile internet and the mapping of spatio-temporal trends in severe cases of COVID-19 were used to characterize each municipality in the country. Around 18% of the Brazilian elderly population is more than 4 kilometers away from a vaccination room. In total, 4,790 municipalities showed a tendency for cases of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome to worsen. The North and Northeast regions had the highest number of Basic Health Units more than 5 kilometers away from cell phone antennas. The National Vaccination Plan requires the use of innovative strategies to overcome the country&#39;s challenges. The use of methodologies based on spatial artificial intelligence can contribute to improving the planning of response actions to COVID-19.
34076131	This article addresses the occurrence of health problems resulting from firearm injuries (FAF) that affected active military police officers in the Metropolitan Region of Rio de Janeiro (RJ). Documentary research, through analysis of medical records of military police officers treated at the Military Police Central Hospital (HCPM) as a result of FAF, from June 2015 to December 2017 according to variables related to the professional profile, the characteristics of the event and of the injury, the spatial distribution of the FAF and the health units involved in the care. During the period investigated, 475 military police officers suffered injuries from firearms: 98.3% were male, 77.3% were on duty, 97.9% were soldiers. Regarding the anatomical location of the injuries, the most affected regions were: lower (41.1%) and upper limbs (33.1%), head-neck-face region (23.5%) and chest-abdomen (17, 3%). The areas in the Metropolitan Region of Rio de Janeiro where the highest occurrences of firearm morbidity were found were planning areas 3 and 1 and Baixada Fluminense. A correlation was found between police morbidity rates due to firearms in municipalities in the metropolitan region and demographic density (p = 0.024).
34076133	Analyze the network of correlations between the dimensions of the Effort-Reward Imbalance Model (ER), resilience and quality of life in military police officers. Cross-sectional study carried out with 258 police officers from the Special Operations Battalion (BOE) of the Military Police of a city in Rio Grande do Sul. The DER Model, resilience and World Health Quality of Life (WHOQOL-bref) scales assessed psychosocial stress, resilience and quality of life. Descriptive and analytical statistics were performed, with network analysis. The dimensions of the DER Model and resilience correlated with all WHOQOL domains (p&lt;0.001). The network model indicated a negative association between effort, overcommitment and the physical and environmental domains. The environment domain was positively associated with reward, and resilience was positively associated with the general, physical and psychological domains. It was concluded that psychosocial stress interferes with the quality of life of military police officers and resilience can act as a protective factor.
34076134	The objective of this article is to evaluate the association between body image and sociodemographic variables and health behaviors, by male and female gender. Data from 6,289 women and 5,188 men, between 35 and 59 years old, participants in the baseline of the Longitudinal Study of Adult Health (ELSA-Brazil) were analyzed using multinomial regression. Among women, the chance of dissatisfaction with feeling thin was higher among those with less education and those who consumed fruit weekly. Practicing moderate physical activity reduced the chance of this type of dissatisfaction by 50%. Higher degrees of dissatisfaction with being overweight were observed among married women, those who practice light physical activity and former smokers. Men with a medium level of education and excessive alcohol consumption had around a 50% higher chance of being dissatisfied with being underweight, as practicing light or moderate physical activity increased this chance by 75% and 94%, respectively. Among men, practicing light and moderate physical activity also increases the chance of dissatisfaction due to being overweight. These findings contribute to reinforcing that unhealthy habits and behaviors can influence body image dissatisfaction with different standards, according to gender.
34076135	The objective of this article is to investigate the relationship between physical intimate partner violence (IPV) and the supply of breast milk (BM), breast milk substitutes (SLM) and the use of bottles among children between 12 and 15 months. Cross-sectional study with mothers in health units in the city of Rio de Janeiro, carried out between June 2005 and December 2009. VFPI was identified by the Brazilian version of the Conflict Tactics Scales 1- Form R and feeding practices were identified by recall of 24 hours. The associations were verified by logistic regression using odds ratio (OR) estimates and 95% confidence intervals. Breast milk was offered to 58.5% of children and breast milk substitutes to 88.5%, and 70.5% of children used a bottle. Physical violence was observed in 26.7% of couples. In homes where couples physically attack each other there is a greater chance of not offering breast milk, a greater chance of offering breast milk substitutes and using a bottle compared to homes where there is no physical violence. The results draw attention to the need to investigate intra-family relationships in cases where inadequate breastfeeding practices are identified, and to train health professionals to support families in conflict situations.
34076136	The objective of this study is to describe the food environment of a medium-sized municipality in Southern Brazil and relate the availability of different types of food stores to the socioeconomic and demographic characteristics of the surrounding area. This is an ecological study in 45 buffers, measuring 400m, in São Leopoldo, Rio Grande do Sul. The buffer was calculated based on the centroid of the homes of women participating in a larger research project. All streets were covered to identify food establishments, which had their geographic coordinates recorded, as well as being evaluated, using the NEMS (Nutrition Environment Measures Survey in Stores) questionnaire, on the availability, price and quality of 108 items. The businesses were classified into supermarkets, grocery stores, fruit stores and convenience stores. Supermarkets and grocery stores were more present in the buffers with the lowest income and grocery stores were more present in those with the highest population tercile. A direct relationship is observed between NEMS scores and income tertile for supermarkets, grocery stores and fruit stores and an indirect relationship for the same businesses and population tertile. The availability of healthy foods was higher in areas with higher income and fewer inhabitants, which signals the need for better distribution of stores and food varieties.
34076137	The objectives of the study were to evaluate the prevalence of self-reported visual difficulties among academics aged 18 to 39 years old at the Federal University of Pelotas and to validate a question about visual difficulties in a subsample of participants, with data collected between November 2017 and July 2018. A cross-sectional study was carried out with the question “Do you have any difficulty seeing up close and/or far away?” As the gold standard for the validation study, visual acuity (VA) was measured using the Snellen table. AV is considered altered when it is less than 20/40 in either eye. The prevalence of self-reported visual difficulty was 37.3% (95%CI: 35.1-39.6) and that of VA less than 20/40 in either eye was 6.9% (95%CI: 5.3-8 ,9). The question presented sensitivity 71.4% (95%CI: 57.8-82.7), specificity 66.9% (95%CI: 63.4-70.2), positive predictive value 13.8% (95%CI: 10.0-18.3) and negative predictive value 96.9% (95%CI: 95.1-98.2). The results indicated a high prevalence of self-reported visual difficulty among university students and a question with reasonable sensitivity and specificity and a high negative predictive value, which can be used as a screening tool for consultations with an ophthalmologist and in epidemiological studies with young adult university students.
34076154	To identify the mortality predictive capacity of the Revised Trauma Score, Rapid Emergency Medicine Score, modified Rapid Emergency Medicine Score and Simplified Acute Physiology Score III in victims of blunt trauma admitted to an intensive care unit and compare their performance. Retrospective cohort of patients with blunt trauma in an intensive care unit based on medical records. Receiver Operating Characteristic and 95% confidence interval of the area under the curve were analyzed to compare the results. Of the 165 patients analyzed, 66.7% had surgical treatment. Intensive care unit and hospital mortality were 17.6% and 20.6%, respectively. For mortality in intensive care, there was a variation in the areas under the curve between 0.672 and 0.738; however, better results were observed in surgical patients (0.747 to 0.811). Similar results were observed for in-hospital mortality. In all analyses, the areas under the index curve did not differ significantly. There was moderate accuracy in severity indices, with improved performance when applied to surgical patients. The four indices presented similar predictions for the analyzed outcomes.
34076179	To compare the effect of non-nutritive sucking, 25% oral glucose and 25% oral glucose combined with non-nutritive sucking on pain relief in premature newborns undergoing heel puncture for blood glucose monitoring. Randomized crossover clinical trial, with 34 premature infants who randomly received the following interventions: non-nutritive sucking, 25% oral glucose and the two interventions combined for three consecutive days during heel puncture for blood glucose monitoring. Assessment using the Premature Infant Pain Profile for 30 seconds before the intervention, called the baseline period, and for 5 minutes after the puncture. The combination of interventions caused premature babies to return to the baseline period, 1 minute and 30 seconds after heel puncture, promoting a percentage reduction of 2.2% on the scale. Comparison of the effect of isolated and combined interventions showed that, when offered in combination, premature babies were able to return to baseline parameters more quickly. Brazilian Clinical Trials Registry: RBR-3gm6w5.
34076180	To analyze fake news about immunobiologicals, taking vaccine hesitancy as a reference in the 3Cs model (trust, complacency and convenience) of the World Health Organization. This is a qualitative research of an exploratory nature that used content analysis to analyze fake news in three national news checking sites. 20 fake news related to immunobiologicals were analyzed, 55% of which were published in 2018 and 63% related to the yellow fever vaccine. From the analysis of the results, two empirical categories were considered: Immunobiologicals have a potential risk of death/sequelae and Immunobiologicals are ineffective. Fake news has the potential to produce vaccine hesitancy based on the 3Cs model. Therefore, it is necessary to rethink communicative practices in health that do not underestimate the asymmetries and inequities that characterize the unequal Brazilian society. Considering that nursing is the largest workforce in vaccination rooms, there is a need to engage these professionals as an active vehicle of truthful information on immunobiologicals for the population.
34076209	To investigate factors associated with the notification of noise-induced hearing loss (Pair), in the Notifiable Diseases Information System in Brazil. Ecological study to estimate the proportion of municipalities reporting Pair. Logistic regression models were used to identify associated factors. Between 2013 and 2015, 277 (5.0%) municipalities notified Pair. The notification was more common among municipalities with Cerest coverage (OR=1.62 - 95%CI 1.02;2.59) or that hosted a Cerest unit in their territory (OR=4.37 - 95%CI 2.75; 6.93), the shortest distance from the state capital (OR=1.43 - 95%CI 1.06;1.92) and with a high human development index (OR=2.35 - 95%CI 1.16;4 ,75). Among the municipalities located in an area covered by Cerest, notification was more common when there was a speech therapist on the team (OR=1.96 - 95%CI 1.47;2.63) and professional turnover was low (OR=1. 88 - 95%CI 1.40;2.52). Contextual factors influence Pair notification, notably the existence and qualification of Cerest.
34076227	To analyze the prevalence and factors associated with polypharmacy in elderly people living in Rio Branco, Acre, Brazil, in 2014. Population-based cross-sectional study, obtained through complex sampling, with elderly people. Polypharmacy was defined as the concomitant use of five or more drugs. The prevalence of polypharmacy was 14.9% (95%CI 11.8;18.6), positively associated with female gender (OR=2.29 - 95%CI 1.41;3.74), race/skin color white (OR=1.61 - 95%CI 1.10;2.38), dependence (OR=1.65 - 95%CI 1.05;2.60), change in eating habits/use of diet (OR=1 .66 - 95%CI 1.16;2.36), hospitalization in the last 12 months (OR=1.61 - 95%CI 1.02;2.53) and presence of the following self-reported morbidities: systemic arterial hypertension (OR=2 .40 - 95%CI 1.33;4.34), diabetes mellitus (OR=2.17 - 95%CI 1.23;3.84), osteoporosis (OR=2.92 - 95%CI 1.84;4, 64) and heart problems (OR=2.94 - 95%CI 1.90;4.56). Polypharmacy in the elderly found in this study was associated with demographic and health conditions.
34076228	To analyze aspects related to positivity for schistosomiasis in a low prevalence area in Brazil. Cross-sectional study, carried out in the first half of 2020, when the proportion of positivity was analyzed, depending on the number of Kato-Katz slides, the diagnostic performance of the test and the estimation of positivity based on data from the Information System of the Health Program. Surveillance and Control of Schistosomiasis (SISPCE). 2,088 slides from 348 individuals were analyzed, with the proportion of positivity being 11.8%, 26.7% and 31.0% for 1, 4 and 6 slides analyzed, respectively. There was excellent agreement (Kappa index = 0.91) when comparing readings from 4 and 6 slides. Underreporting of 2.1 times was estimated in SISPCE data. Increasing the number of slides increased Kato-Katz positivity, which may contribute to maximizing control of the disease as a Public Health problem.
34076229	To analyze the prevalence and factors associated with intimate partner violence during pregnancy. Cross-sectional study, with data obtained from interviews with pregnant women aged 10 to 49 years, in the third trimester of pregnancy, living in Caxias, Maranhão, Brazil (2019-2020). The World Health Organization Violence Against Women Study instrument was used to identify the form of violence. Hierarchical analysis was performed using multiple logistic regression. 233 pregnant women were interviewed. Violence during pregnancy had a prevalence of 33.0%, with a predominance of psychological violence (18.9%). In the final hierarchical model, the woman&#39;s age &lt;20 years (ORaj=2.09 - IC95% 1.17;3.54) and the consumption of illicit drugs by her partner (ORaj=8.78 - IC95% 2.13 ;28,92) remained associated with the outcome of violence. Violence during pregnancy was highly prevalent, with the young age of the woman and the use of illicit substances by her partner being factors associated with its occurrence.
34077986	To study a sample of patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA), investigating their gynecological and obstetric history, comparing them with controls, aiming to understand their influence on the number of pregnancies, menarche, menopause and reproductive years at the onset of RA. METHODS: This is a cross-sectional study of 122 patients with RA and 126 controls. Patients and controls were asked about age at menarche, age at menopause, number of pregnancies and miscarriages. Reproductive years were calculated as the difference between age at menopause and age at menarche. For comparison, Mann Whitney, unpaired t-test, chi-square test and Spearman test were used. The significance adopted was 5%. In patients with RA and postmenopausal onset of the disease, the period of reproductive years (age at menopause - age at menarche) showed a positive correlation with the age at onset of the disease (rho = 0.46; 95% confidence interval [95%CI] = 0.20–0.55 with <i>p</i> = 0.0008). The number of pregnancies was higher in patients with disease onset in the postmenopausal period when compared to premenopausal patients (median of 3 with interquartile range [IIQ] = 2–4 versus median of 2 with IQR = 1–3; <i>p</i> = 0.009). In patients with RA, a greater number of pregnancies was observed than in the control group ( <i>p</i> = 0.0002). CONCLUSION: The present study shows that, in our population, the reduction in reproductive years and the high number of pregnancies are related to the emergence of RA.
34077987	Most prenatal screening programs for toxoplasmosis use immunoassays on serum samples from pregnant women. Few studies evaluate the accuracy of screening tests on dried blood samples, which are easy to collect, store and transport. This study aimed to determine the performance and evaluate the agreement between an immunoassay on dried blood and a reference test on serum from pregnant women from a population-based prenatal screening program for toxoplasmosis in Brazil. METHODS: A cross-sectional study was carried out to compare the immunoassays Immunoscreen Toxoplasmosis IgM and Immunoscreen Toxoplasmosis IgG (Mbiolog Diagnósticos, Ltda., Contagem, Minas Gerais, Brazil) in dried blood with the reference standard enzyme- <i>linked</i> fluorescent assay <i>fluorescent assay</i> , ELFA, BioMérieux SA, Lion, France) in the serum of pregnant women from the Minas Gerais Congenital Toxoplasmosis Control Program. The dried blood test was able to discriminate the positive and negative results of pregnant women when compared to the reference test, with an accuracy of 98.2% for immunoglobulin G (IgG), and 95.8% for immunoglobulin M (IgM). CONCLUSION: Dried blood performs well and is a sample that is easy to collect, store and transport, which makes it a promising method for prenatal toxoplasmosis screening programs in countries with continental dimensions, limited resources, and high prevalence of toxoplasmosis , as is the case in Brazil.
34077988	To clarify the possible antitumor role of <sub>DC</sub> γδ T cells and <sub>DC</sub> αβ T cells in an experimental model of breast cancer. METHODS: Thirty spleens of Balb/c mice analyzed by flow cytometry, separated into the control group ( <i>n</i> = 15) and the tumor group induced by 4T1 ( <i>n</i> = 15). Presence of 26.53% of T <sub>DC</sub> γδ in mice in the control group ( <i>p</i> &lt; 0.0001), proportion of T <sub>DC</sub> αβ lower in splenic cells than T <sub>DC</sub> γδ; however, these two cell types are reduced under tumor conditions ( <i>p</i> &lt; 0.0001), and the proportion of cytokines IFN-γ, TNF-α, IL-12 and IL-17 produced by γδ <sub>DC</sub> T cells was higher than than those produced by <sub>DC</sub> αβ T cells, but were decreased under conditions of tumor-related immune system response ( <i>p</i> &lt; 0.0001). CONCLUSION: Healthy mice induced with 4T1 breast tumor presented T <sub>DC</sub> with TCR γδ repertoire. These cells express cytotoxic T lymphocyte molecules, producing anti-tumor proinflammatory cytokines.
34077989	To evaluate serum adiponectin levels in pregnant adolescents between 30 and 36 weeks of gestation. METHODS: Prospective and cross-sectional study including 67 normal pregnant women between 30 and 36 weeks and eutrophic (body mass index [BMI]: 18.5–25 kg/m <sup>2</sup> ), 36 adolescents (&lt; 20 years) and 31 adults (≥ 20 years). Serum adiponectin levels were assessed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). For comparison between groups, the t-Student or Mann-Whitney tests were used. Adolescent pregnant women had significantly higher serum adiponectin concentrations than adult women ( <i>p</i> = 0.04). There were no differences in adiponectin levels when comparing early (&lt; 16 years) to late (≥ 16 years) pregnant adolescents. Adiponectin values ​​were subdivided into 3 groups: &lt; 3,000 ng/mL, between 3,000 and 5,000 ng/mL and &gt; 5,000 ng/mL. Newborn weight was significantly higher in women with &gt; 5,000 ng/mL, when compared to those with &lt; 3,000 ng/mL in the adolescent group. No association was observed between adiponectin levels and pre-pregnancy BMI, gestational weight gain and gestational age, however there was a positive relationship with the newborn&#39;s weight ( <i>p</i> = 0.0239). CONCLUSION: Serum adiponectin values ​​in pregnant adolescents between 30 and 36 weeks of gestation were higher than those in adult pregnant women; however, there were no differences between early and late adolescent pregnant women.
34077990	In a healthy athlete, the caloric intake is sufficient for the sporting energy needs and for the body&#39;s physiological functions, allowing a balance between energy availability (ED), bone metabolism and menstrual function. On the other hand, an imbalance due to low energy availability (BDE) due to a restrictive diet, eating disorders or large periods of energy expenditure leads to a multisystem dysregulation prioritizing the body&#39;s essential functions. This phenomenon, initially described as the female athlete triad and, currently, as relative energy deficit in sport (RED-S), has as its pillars BDE, menstrual dysfunction and changes in bone mineral density (BMD), being present in a considerable percentage of high-competition athletes, with harmful consequences for their short, medium and long-term future. This review was carried out based on a critical analysis of the most recent publications available and aims to provide a global perception of the RED-S theme. The objective is to promote the acquisition of more consolidated knowledge on an undervalued topic, enabling the acquisition of preventive strategies, early diagnosis and/or appropriate treatment.
34077991	Placental pathophysiology in SARS-CoV-2 infection can help researchers understand more about the infection and its impact on maternal/neonatal outcomes. This brief review provides an overview of some aspects of placental pathology in SARS-CoV-2 infection. In total, 11 articles were included. Current literature suggests that there are no specific histopathological features in placentas related to SARS-CoV-2 infection, but placentas from infected women are more likely to have findings of maternal and/or fetal malperfusion. The most common findings in placentas from infected women were fibrin deposition and intense recruitment of inflammatory infiltrate. Transplacental transmission of this virus is unlikely due to low expression of the receptor for SARS-CoV-2 in placental cell types. More studies are needed to improve our knowledge about the interaction between the virus and the mother-fetus dyad and the impact on maternal and neonatal/fetal outcomes.
